"Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!"
by Richard P. Feynman 

IT'S HARD NOT TO SMILE ALL THE WAY THROUGH." - Newsweek 

Richard Feynman won the Nobel prize in physics, is one of the world's greatest 
theoretical physicists, and is a man who has fallen, often jumped, into outrageous 
adventure. He has been raising eyebrows ever since he shocked a dean's wife at Princeton 
and she was moved to exclaim: "Surely you're joking, Mr. Feynman!" 

"A STORYTELLER IN THE TRADITION OF MARK TWAIN. HE PROVES ONCE AGAIN 
THAT IT IS POSSIBLE TO LAUGH OUT LOUD AND SCRATCH YOUR HEAD AT THE SAME 
TIME!" -- The New York Times Book Review 

Feynman is surely the only person in history to solve the mystery of liquid helium 
and to be commissioned to paint a naked female toreador; to expertly crack the 
uncrackable safes guarding the Atomic Bomb’s most critical secrets and to play a skillful 
frigideira in a Brazilian samba band. He has traded ideas with Einstein and Bohr; 
discussed gambling odds with Nick the Greek; and accompanied a ballet on the bongo 
drums. 

"FEYNMAN'S BUMPTIOUS REFUSAL TO TAKE ANY PROPOSITION ON SECOND-HAND 
OR HEARSAY EVIDENCE, HIS PRISTINE CURIOSITY ABOUT HOW THINGS WORK, IS 
CLOSELY RELATED TO THE GIFTS THAT UNDERLIE DISTINGUISHED SCIENCE... ALL 
OF US COULD STAND SOME STRETCHING IN THE FEYNMAN DIRECTION. IT MIGHT 
EVEN BE FUN!" ~ The Washington Post 

Woven with his scintillating views on science today, Feynman's astonishing life 
story is a combustible mixture of high intelligence, unlimited curiosity, eternal 
skepticism, and raging chutzpah. 


"BOOKS LIKE THIS ARE TEMPTATIONS TO GIVE UP READING AND DEVOTE LIFE TO 
REREADING... THE BOOK IS A LITMUS PAPER: ANYONE WHO CAN READ IT WITHOUT 
LAUGHING OUT LOUD IS BAD CRAZY!' ~ Los Angeles Times Book Review 





This low-priced Bantam Book 
has been completely reset in a type face 
designed for easy reading, and was printed 
from new plates. It contains the complete 
text of the original hard-cover edition . 

NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED. 

"Surely You're Joking, Mr Feynman! " 

Preface 

The stories in this book were collected intermittently and informally during seven 
years of very enjoyable drumming with Richard Feynman. I have found each story by 
itself to be amusing, and the collection taken together to be amazing: That one person 
could have so many wonderfully crazy things happen to him in one life is sometimes hard 
to believe. That one person could invent so much innocent mischief in one life is surely 
an inspiration! 

Ralph Leighton 


Introduction 

I hope these won't be the only memoirs of Richard Feynman. Certainly the 
reminiscences here give a true picture of much of his character — his almost compulsive 
need to solve puzzles, his provocative mischievousness, his indignant impatience with 
pretension and hypocrisy, and his talent for one-upping anybody who tries to one-up him! 
This book is great reading: outrageous, shocking, still warm and very human. 

For all that, it only skirts the keystone of his life: science. We see it here and 
there, as background material in one sketch or another, but never as the focus of his 
existence, which generations of his students and colleagues know it to be. Perhaps 
nothing else is possible. There may be no way to construct such a series of delightful 
stories about himself and his work: the challenge and frustration, the excitement that caps 
insight, the deep pleasure of scientific understanding that has been the wellspring of 
happiness in his life. 

I remember when I was his student how it was when you walked into one of his 
lectures. He would be standing in front of the hall smiling at us all as we came in, his 
fingers tapping out a complicated rhythm on the black top of the demonstration bench 
that crossed the front of the lecture hall. As latecomers took their seats, he picked up the 
chalk and began spinning it rapidly through his fingers in a manner of a professional 
gambler playing with a poker chip, still smiling happily as if at some secret joke. And 
then — still smiling — he talked to us about physics, his diagrams and equations helping 
us to share his understanding. It was no secret joke that brought the smile and the sparkle 
in his eye, it was physics. The joy of physics! The joy was contagious. We are fortunate 
who caught that infection. Now here is your opportunity to be exposed to the joy of life in 
the style of Feynman. 

Albert R. Hibbs 

Senior Member of the Technical Staff, 

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 

California Institute of Technology 

Vitals 

Some facts about my timing: I was born in 1918 in a small town called Far 
Rockaway, right on the outskirts of New York, near the sea. I lived there until 1935, 
when I was seventeen. I went to MIT for four years, and then I went to Princeton, in 
about 1939. During the time I was at Princeton I started to work on the Manhattan 
Project, and I ultimately went to Los Alamos in April 1943, until something like October 
or November 1946, when I went to Cornell. 

I got married to Arlene in 1941, and she died of tuberculosis while I was at Los 
Alamos, in 1946. 

I was at Cornell until about 1951.1 visited Brazil in the summer of 1949 and spent 
half a year there in 1951, and then went to Caltech, where I've been ever since. 

I went to Japan at the end of 1951 for a couple of weeks, and then again, a year or 
two later, just after I married my second wife, Mary Lou. 

I am now married to Gweneth, who is English, and we have two children, Carl 
and Michelle. 

R. P. F. 


Part 1 

From Far Rockaway to MIT 


He Fixes Radios by Thinking! 

When I was about eleven or twelve I set up a lab in my house. It consisted of an 
old wooden packing box that I put shelves in. I had a heater, and I’d put in fat and cook 
french-fried potatoes all the time. I also had a storage battery, and a lamp bank. 

To build the lamp bank I went down to the five-and-ten and got some sockets you 
can screw down to a wooden base, and connected them with pieces of bell wire. By 
making different combinations of switches — in series or parallel — I knew I could get 
different voltages. But what I hadn't realized was that a bulb’s resistance depends on its 
temperature, so the results of my calculations weren’t the same as the stuff that came out 
of the circuit. But it was all right, and when the bulbs were in series, all half-lit, they 
would gloooooooooow, very pretty — it was great! 

I had a fuse in the system so if I shorted anything, the fuse would blow. Now I 
had to have a fuse that was weaker than the fuse in the house, so I made my own fuses by 
taking tin foil and wrapping it around an old burnt-out fuse. Across my fuse I had a five- 
watt bulb, so when my fuse blew, the load from the trickle charger that was always 
charging the storage battery would light up the bulb. The bulb was on the switchboard 
behind a piece of brown candy paper (it looks red when a light's behind it) — so if 
something went off, I’d look up to the switchboard and there would be a big red spot 
where the fuse went. It was fun! 

I enjoyed radios. I started with a crystal set that I bought at the store, and I used to 
listen to it at night in bed while I was going to sleep, through a pair of earphones. When 
my mother and father went out until late at night, they would come into my room and 
take the earphones off — and worry about what was going into my head while I was 
asleep. 

About that time I invented a burglar alarm, which was a very simple-minded 
thing: it was just a big battery and a bell connected with some wire. When the door to my 
room opened, it pushed the wire against the battery and closed the circuit, and the bell 
would go off. 

One night my mother and father came home from a night out and very, very 
quietly, so as not to disturb the child, opened the door to come into my room to take my 
earphones off. All of a sudden this tremendous bell went off with a helluva racket — 
BONG BONG BONG BONG BONG!!! I jumped out of bed yelling, "It worked! It 
worked!" 

I had a Ford coil — a spark coil from an automobile — and I had the spark 
tenninals at the top of my switchboard. I would put a Raytheon RH tube, which had 
argon gas in it, across the terminals, and the spark would make a purple glow inside the 
vacuum — it was just great! 

One day I was playing with the Ford coil, punching holes in paper with the 
sparks, and the paper caught on fire. Soon I couldn’t hold it any more because it was 
burning near my fingers, so I dropped it in a metal wastebasket which had a lot of 
newspapers in it. Newspapers burn fast, you know, and the flame looked pretty big inside 



the room. I shut the door so my mother — who was playing bridge with some friends in 
the living room — wouldn’t find out there was a fire in my room, took a magazine that 
was lying nearby, and put it over the wastebasket to smother the fire. 

After the fire was out I took the magazine off, but now the room began to fill up 
with smoke. The wastebasket was still too hot to handle, so I got a pair of pliers, carried it 
across the room, and held it out the window for the smoke to blow out. 

But because it was breezy outside, the wind lit the fire again, and now the 
magazine was out of reach. So I pulled the flaming wastebasket back in through the 
window to get the magazine, and I noticed there were curtains in the window — it was 
very dangerous! 

Well, I got the magazine, put the fire out again, and this time kept the magazine 
with me while I shook the glowing coals out of the wastepaper basket onto the street, two 
or three floors below. Then I went out of my room, closed the door behind me, and said 
to my mother, "I'm going out to play," and the smoke went out slowly through the 
windows. I also did some things with electric motors and built an amplifier for a photo 
cell that I bought that could make a bell ring when I put my hand in front of the cell. I 
didn't get to do as much as I wanted to, because my mother kept putting me out all the 
time, to play. But I was often in the house, fiddling with my lab. 

I bought radios at rummage sales. I didn’t have any money, but it wasn’t very 
expensive — they were old, broken radios, and I’d buy them and try to fix them. Usually 
they were broken in some simple-minded way — some obvious wire was hanging loose, 
or a coil was broken or partly unwound — so I could get some of them going. On one of 
these radios one night I got WACO in Waco, Texas — it was tremendously exciting! 

On this same tube radio up in my lab I was able to hear a station up in 
Schenectady called WGN. Now, all of us kids — my two cousins, my sister, and the 
neighborhood kids — listened on the radio downstairs to a program called the Eno Crime 
Club — Eno effervescent salts — it was the thing! Well, I discovered that I could hear this 
program up in my lab on WGN one hour before it was broadcast in New York! So I’d 
discover what was going to happen, and then, when we were all sitting around the radio 
downstairs listening to the Eno Crime Club, I'd say, "You know, we haven’t heard from 
so-and-so in a long time. I betcha he comes and saves the situation." 

Two seconds later, bup-bup, he comes! So they all got excited about this, and I 
predicted a couple of other things. Then they realized that there must be some trick to it — 
that I must know, somehow. So I owned up to what it was, that I could hear it upstairs the 
hour before. 

You know what the result was, naturally. Now they couldn’t wait for the regular 
hour. They all had to sit upstairs in my lab with this little creaky radio for half an hour, 
listening to the Eno Crime Club from Schenectady. 

We lived at that time in a big house; it was left by my grandfather to his children, 
and they didn’t have much money aside from the house. It was a very large, wooden 
house, and I would run wires all around the outside, and had plugs in all the rooms, so I 
could always listen to my radios, which were upstairs in my lab. I also had a 
loudspeaker — not the whole speaker, but the part without the big horn on it. 

One day, when I had my earphones on, I connected them to the loudspeaker, and I 
discovered something: I put my finger in the speaker and I could hear it in the earphones; 

I scratched the speaker and I’d hear it in the earphones. So I discovered that the speaker 



could act like a microphone, and you didn’t even need any batteries. At school we were 
talking about Alexander Graham Bell, so I gave a demonstration of the speaker and the 
earphones. I didn’t know it at the time, but I think it was the type of telephone he 
originally used. 

So now I had a microphone, and I could broadcast from upstairs to downstairs, 
and from downstairs to upstairs, using the amplifiers of my rummage-sale radios. At that 
time my sister Joan, who was nine years younger than I was, must have been about two 
or three, and there was a guy on the radio called Uncle Don that she liked to listen to. 
He’d sing little songs about "good children," and so on, and he’d read cards sent in by 
parents telling that "Mary So-and-so is having a birthday this Saturday at 25 Flatbush 
Avenue." 

One day my cousin Francis and I sat Joan down and said that there was a special 
program she should listen to. Then we ran upstairs and we started to broadcast: "This is 
Uncle Don. We know a very nice little girl named Joan who lives on New Broadway; 
she's got a birthday coming — not today, but such-and-such. She's a cute girl." We sang a 
little song, and then we made music: "Deedle leet deet, doodle doodle loot doot; deedle 
deedle leet, doodle loot doot doo. . . " We went through the whole deal, and then we came 
downstairs: "How was it? Did you l ik e the program?" 

"It was good," she said, "but why did you make the music with your mouth?" 

One day I got a telephone call: "Mister, are you Richard Feynman?" 

"Yes." 

"This is a hotel. We have a radio that doesn’t work, and would like it repaired. We 
understand you might be able to do something about it." 

"But I'm only a little boy," I said. "I don't know how —" 

"Yes, we know that, but we’d like you to come over anyway." 

It was a hotel that my aunt was running, but I didn’t know that. I went over there 
with — they still tell the story — a big screwdriver in my back pocket. Well, I was small, 
so any screwdriver looked big in my back pocket. 

I went up to the radio and tried to fix it. I didn’t know anything about it, but there 
was also a handyman at the hotel, and either he noticed, or I noticed, a loose knob on the 
rheostat — to turn up the volume — so that it wasn’t turning the shaft. He went off and 
filed something, and fixed it up so it worked. 

The next radio I tried to fix didn’t work at all. That was easy: it wasn’t plugged in 
right. As the repair jobs got more and more complicated, I got better and better, and more 
elaborate. I bought myself a milliammeter in New York and converted it into a voltmeter 
that had different scales on it by using the right lengths (which I calculated) of very fine 
copper wire. It wasn't very accurate, but it was good enough to tell whether things were 
in the right ballpark at different connections in those radio sets. 

The main reason people hired me was the Depression. They didn’t have any 
money to fix their radios, and they'd hear about this kid who would do it for less. So I’d 
climb on roofs to fix antennas, and all kinds of stuff. I got a series of lessons of ever- 
increasing difficulty. Ultimately I got some job like converting a DC set into an AC set, 
and it was very hard to keep the hum from going through the system, and I didn’t build it 
quite right. I shouldn’t have bitten that one off, but I didn't know. 

One job was really sensational. I was working at the time for a printer, and a man 



who knew that printer knew I was trying to get jobs fixing radios, so he sent a fellow 
around to the print shop to pick me up. The guy is obviously poor — his car is a complete 
wreck — and we go to his house which is in a cheap part of town. On the way, I say, 
"What's the trouble with the radio?" 

He says, "When I turn it on it makes a noise, and after a while the noise stops and 
everything's all right, but I don't l ik e the noise at the beginning." 

I think to myself: "What the hell! If he hasn't got any money, you'd think he could 
stand a little noise for a while." 

And all the time, on the way to his house, he's saying things like, "Do you know 
anything about radios? How do you know about radios — you're just a little boy!" 

He's putting me down the whole way, and I'm thinking, "So what's the matter with 
him? So it makes a little noise." 

But when we got there I went over to the radio and turned it on. Little noise? My 
God! No wonder the poor guy couldn't stand it. The thing began to roar and wobble — 
WUH BUH BUH BUH BUH — A tremendous amount of noise. Then it quieted down 
and played correctly. So I started to think: "How can that happen?" 

I start walking back and forth, thinking, and I realize that one way it can happen is 
that the tubes are heating up in the wrong order — that is, the amplifier’s all hot, the tubes 
are ready to go, and there’s nothing feeding in, or there’s some back circuit feeding in, or 
something wrong in the beginning part — the RF part — and therefore it’s making a lot of 
noise, picking up something. And when the RF circuit's finally going, and the grid 
voltages are adjusted, everything's all right. 

So the guy says, "What are you doing? You come to fix the radio, but you're only 
walking back and forth!" 

I say, "I'm thinking!" Then I said to myself, "All right, take the tubes out, and 
reverse the order completely in the set." (Many radio sets in those days used the same 
tubes in different places — 212's, I think they were, or 212-A's.) So I changed the tubes 
around, stepped to the front of the radio, turned the thing on, and it's as quiet as a lamb: it 
waits until it heats up, and then plays perfectly — no noise. 

When a person has been negative to you, and then you do something like that, 
they're usually a hundred percent the other way, kind of to compensate. He got me other 
jobs, and kept telling everybody what a tremendous genius I was, saying, "He fixes radios 
by thinking!” The whole idea of thinking, to fix a radio — a little boy stops and thinks, 
and figures out how to do it — he never thought that was possible. 

Radio circuits were much easier to understand in those days because everything 
was out in the open. After you took the set apart (it was a big problem to find the right 
screws), you could see this was a resistor, that's a condenser, here's a this, there's a that; 
they were all labeled. And if wax had been dripping from the condenser, it was too hot 
and you could tell that the condenser was burned out. If there was charcoal on one of the 
resistors you knew where the trouble was. Or, if you couldn’t tell what was the matter by 
looking at it, you'd test it with your voltmeter and see whether voltage was coming 
through. The sets were simple, the circuits were not complicated. The voltage on the 
grids was always about one and a half or two volts and the voltages on the plates were 
one hundred or two hundred, DC. So it wasn’t hard for me to fix a radio by understanding 
what was going on inside, noticing that something wasn't working right, and fixing it. 

Sometimes it took quite a while. I remember one particular time when it took the 



whole afternoon to find a burned-out resistor that was not apparent. That particular time it 
happened to be a friend of my mother, so I had time — there was nobody on my back 
saying, "What are you doing?" Instead, they were saying, "Would you like a little milk, 
or some cake?" I finally fixed it because I had, and still have, persistence. Once I get on a 
puzzle, I can't get off. If my mother's friend had said, "Never mind, it's too much work," 
I’d have blown my top, because I want to beat this damn thing, as long as I've gone this 
far. I can't just leave it after I've found out so much about it. I have to keep going to find 
out ultimately what is the matter with it in the end. 

That’s a puzzle drive. It's what accounts for my wanting to decipher Mayan 
hieroglyphics, for trying to open safes. I remember in high school, during first period a 
guy would come to me with a puzzle in geometry, or something which had been assigned 
in his advanced math class. I wouldn’t stop until I figured the damn thing out — it would 
take me fifteen or twenty minutes. But during the day, other guys would come to me with 
the same problem, and I'd do it for them in a flash. So for one guy, to do it took me 
twenty minutes, while there were five guys who thought I was a super-genius. 

So I got a fancy reputation. During high school every puzzle that was known to 
man must have come to me. Every damn, crazy conundrum that people had invented, I 
knew. So when I got to MIT there was a dance, and one of the seniors had his girlfriend 
there, and she knew a lot of puzzles, and he was telling her that I was pretty good at them. 
So during the dance she came over to me and said, "They say you're a smart guy, so 
here's one for you: A man has eight cords of wood to chop. . ." 

And I said, "He starts by chopping every other one in three parts," because I had 
heard that one. 

Then she’d go away and come back with another one, and I'd always know it. 

This went on for quite a while, and finally, near the end of the dance, she came 
over, looking as if she was going to get me for sure this time, and she said, "A mother 
and daughter are traveling to Europe. . ." 

"The daughter got the bubonic plague." She collapsed! That was hardly enough 
clues to get the answer to that one: It was the long story about how a mother and daughter 
stop at a hotel and stay in separate rooms, and the next day the mother goes to the 
daughter's room and there's nobody there, or somebody else is there, and she says, 
"Where's my daughter?" and the hotel keeper says, "What daughter?" and the register's 
got only the mother's name, and so on, and so on, and there's a big mystery as to what 
happened. The answer is, the daughter got bubonic plague, and the hotel, not wanting to 
have to close up, spirits the daughter away, cleans up the room, and erases all evidence of 
her having been there. It was a long tale, but I had heard it, so when the girl started out 
with, "A mother and daughter are traveling to Europe," I knew one thing that started that 
way, so I took a flying guess, and got it. 

We had a thing at high school called the algebra team, which consisted of five 
kids, and we would travel to different schools as a team and have competitions. We 
would sit in one row of seats and the other team would sit in another row. A teacher, who 
was running the contest, would take out an envelope, and on the envelope it says "forty- 
five seconds." She opens it up, writes the problem on the blackboard, and says, "Go!" — 
so you really have more than forty-five seconds because while she's writing you can 
think. Now the game was this: You have a piece of paper, and on it you can write 
anything, you can do anything. The only thing that counted was the answer. If the answer 



was "six books," you'd have to write "6," and put a big circle around it. If what was in the 
circle was right, you won; if it wasn’t, you lost. 

One thing was for sure: It was practically impossible to do the problem in any 
conventional, straightforward way, like putting "A is the number of red books, B is the 
number of blue books," grind, grind, grind, until you get "six books." That would take 
you fifty seconds, because the people who set up the timings on these problems had made 
them all a trifle short. So you had to think, "Is there a way to see it?" Sometimes you 
could see it in a flash, and sometimes you'd have to invent another way to do it and then 
do the algebra as fast as you could. It was wonderful practice, and I got better and better, 
and I eventually got to be the head of the team. So I learned to do algebra very quickly, 
and it came in handy in college. When we had a problem in calculus, I was very quick to 
see where it was going and to do the algebra — fast. 

Another thing I did in high school was to invent problems and theorems. I mean, 
if I were doing any mathematical thing at all, I would find some practical example for 
which it would be useful. I invented a set of right-triangle problems. But instead of giving 
the lengths of two of the sides to find the third, I gave the difference of the two sides. A 
typical example was: There's a flagpole, and there's a rope that comes down from the top. 
When you hold the rope straight down, it's three feet longer than the pole, and when you 
pull the rope out tight, it's five feet from the base of the pole. How high is the pole? 

I developed some equations for solving problems like that, and as a result I 
noticed some connection — perhaps it was sin 2 + cos 2 = 1 — that reminded me of 
trigonometry. Now, a few years earlier, perhaps when I was eleven or twelve, I had read a 
book on trigonometry that I had checked out from the library, but the book was by now 
long gone. I remembered only that trigonometry had something to do with relations 
between sines and cosines. So I began to work out all the relations by drawing triangles, 
and each one I proved, by myself. I also calculated the sine, cosine, and tangent of every 
five degrees, starting with the sine of five degrees as given, by addition and half-angle 
formulas that I had worked out. 

A few years later, when we studied trigonometry in school, I still had my notes 
and I saw that my demonstrations were often different from those in the book. 

Sometimes, for a thing where I didn’t notice a simple way to do it, I went all over the 
place till I got it. Other times, my way was most clever — the standard demonstration in 
the book was much more complicated! So sometimes I had ’em beat, and sometimes it 
was the other way around. 

While I was doing all this trigonometry, I didn’t like the symbols for sine, cosine, 
tangent, and so on. To me, "sin f' looked like s times i times n times f! So I invented 
another symbol, like a square root sign, that was a sigma with a long arm sticking out of 
it, and I put the f underneath. For the tangent it was a tau with the top of the tau extended, 
and for the cosine I made a kind of gamma, but it looked a little bit like the square root 
sign. 

Now the inverse sine was the same sigma, but left-to-right reflected so that it 
started with the horizontal line with the value underneath, and then the sigma. That was 
the inverse sine, NOT sin" 1 f — that was crazy! They had that in books! To me, sin" 1 
meant 1/sine, the reciprocal. So my symbols were better. 

I didn’t l ik e f(x) — that looked to me l ik e f times x. I also didn’t like dy/dx — you 
have a tendency to cancel the d’s — so I made a different sign, something like an & sign. 



For logarithms it was a big L extended to the right, with the thing you take the log of 
inside, and so on. 

I thought my symbols were just as good, if not better, than the regular symbols — 
it doesn’t make any difference what symbols you use — but I discovered later that it does 
make a difference. Once when I was explaining something to another kid in high school, 
without thinking I started to make these symbols, and he said, "What the hell are those?" 

I realized then that if I'm going to talk to anybody else, I'll have to use the standard 
symbols, so I eventually gave up my own symbols. 

I had also invented a set of symbols for the typewriter, like FORTRAN has to do, so 
I could type equations. I also fixed typewriters, with paper clips and rubber bands (the 
rubber bands didn’t break down like they do here in Los Angeles), but I wasn’t a 
professional repairman; I’d just fix them so they would work. But the whole problem of 
discovering what was the matter, and figuring out what you have to do to fix it — that was 
interesting to me, like a puzzle. 


String Beans 

I must have been seventeen or eighteen when I worked one summer in a hotel run 
by my aunt. I don’t know how much I got — twenty-two dollars a month, I think — and I 
alternated eleven hours one day and thirteen the next as a desk clerk or as a busboy in the 
restaurant. And during the afternoon, when you were desk clerk, you had to bring milk up 
to Mrs. D—, an invalid woman who never gave us a tip. That's the way the world was: 
You worked long hours and got nothing for it, every day. 

This was a resort hotel, by the beach, on the outskirts of New York City. The 
husbands would go to work in the city and leave the wives behind to play cards, so you 
would always have to get the bridge tables out. Then at night the guys would play poker, 
so you'd get the tables ready for them — clean out the ashtrays and so on. I was always up 
until late at night, like two o'clock, so it really was thirteen and eleven hours a day. 

There were certain things I didn’t like, such as tipping. I thought we should be 
paid more, and not have to have any tips. But when I proposed that to the boss, I got 
nothing but laughter. She told everybody, "Richard doesn’t want his tips, hee, hee, hee; he 
doesn't want his tips, ha, ha, ha." The world is full of this kind of dumb smart-alec who 
doesn't understand anything. 

Anyway, at one stage there was a group of men who, when they'd come back 
from working in the city, would right away want ice for their drinks. Now the other guy 
working with me had really been a desk clerk. He was older than I was, and a lot more 
professional. One time he said to me, "Listen, we’re always bringing ice up to that guy 
Ungar and he never gives us a tip — not even ten cents. Next time, when they ask for ice, 
just don’t do a damn thing. Then they'll call you back, and when they call you back, you 
say, 'Oh, I’m sorry. I forgot. We’re all forgetful sometimes.’" 

So I did it, and Ungar gave me fifteen cents! But now, when I think back on it, I 
realize that the other desk clerk, the professional, had really known what to do — tell the 
other guy to take the risk of getting into trouble. He put me to the job of training this fella 
to give tips. He never said anything; he made me do it! 

I had to clean up tables in the dining room as a busboy. You pile all this stuff 



from the tables on to a tray at the side, and when it gets high enough you carry it into the 
kitchen. So you get a new tray, right? You should do it in two steps — take the old tray 
away, and put in a new one — but I thought, "I’m going to do it in one step." So I tried to 
slide the new tray under, and pull the old tray out at the same time, and it slipped — 
BANG! All the stuff went on the floor. And then, naturally, the question was, "What 
were you doing? How did it fall?" Well, how could I explain that I was trying to invent a 
new way to handle trays? 

Among the desserts there was some kind of coffee cake that came out very pretty 
on a doily, on a little plate. But if you would go in the back you'd see a man called the 
pantry man. His problem was to get the stuff ready for desserts. Now this man must have 
been a miner, or something — heavy-built, with very stubby, rounded, thick fingers. He’d 
take this stack of doilies, which are manufactured by some sort of stamping process, all 
stuck together, and he’d take these stubby lingers and try to separate the doilies to put 
them on the plates. I always heard him say, "Damn deez doilies!" while he was doing 
this, and I remember thinking, "What a contrast — the person sitting at the table gets this 
nice cake on a doilied plate, while the pantry man back there with the stubby thumbs is 
saying, 'Damn deez doilies!'" So that was the difference between the real world and what 
it looked l ik e. 

My first day on the job the pantry lady explained that she usually made a ham 
sandwich, or something, for the guy who was on the late shift. I said that I liked desserts, 
so if there was a dessert left over from supper, I’d like that. The next night I was on the 
late shift till 2:00 A.M. with these guys playing poker. I was sitting around with nothing to 
do, getting bored, when suddenly I remembered there was a dessert to eat. I went over to 
the icebox and opened it up, and there she’d left six desserts! There was a chocolate 
pudding, a piece of cake, some peach slices, some rice pudding, some jello — there was 
everything! So I sat there and ate the six desserts — it was sensational! 

The next day she said to me, "I left a dessert for you. . ." 

"It was wonderful," I said, "abolutely wonderful!" 

"But I left you six desserts because I didn't know which one you liked the best." 

So from that time on she left six desserts. They weren’t always different, but there 
were always six desserts. 

One time when I was desk clerk a girl left a book by the telephone at the desk 
while she went to eat dinner, so I looked at. it. It was The Life of Leonardo , and I couldn’t 
resist: The girl let me borrow it and I read the whole thing. 

I slept in a little room in the back of the hotel, and there was some stew about 
turning out the lights when you leave your room, which I couldn’t ever remember to do. 
Inspired by the Leonardo book, I made this gadget which consisted of a system of strings 
and weights — Coke bottles full of water — that would operate when I’d open the door, 
lighting the pull-chain light inside. You open the door, and things would go, and light the 
light; then you close the door behind you, and the light would go out. But my real 
accomplishment came later. 

I used to cut vegetables in the kitchen. String beans had to be cut into one-inch 
pieces. The way you were supposed to do it was: You hold two beans in one hand, the 
knife in the other, and you press the knife against the beans and your thumb, almost 
cutting yourself. It was a slow process. So I put my mind to it, and I got a pretty good 
idea. I sat down at the wooden table outside the kitchen, put a bowl in my lap, and stuck a 



very sharp knife into the table at a forty-five-degree angle away from me. Then I put a 
pile of the string beans on each side, and I’d pick out a bean, one in each hand, and bring 
it towards me with enough speed that it would slice, and the pieces would slide into the 
bowl that was in my lap. 

So I'm slicing beans one after the other — chig, chig, chig, chig, chig — and 
everybody's giving me the beans, and I'm going like sixty when the boss comes by and 
says, "What are you doing?” 

I say, "Look at the way I have of cutting beans!" — and just at that moment I put a 
finger through instead of a bean. Blood came out and went on the beans, and there was a 
big excitement: "Look at how many beans you spoiled! What a stupid way to do things!" 
and so on. So I was never able to make any improvement, which would have been easy — 
with a guard, or something — but no, there was no chance for improvement. 

I had another invention, which had a similar difficulty. We had to slice potatoes 
after they'd been cooked, for some kind of potato salad. They were sticky and wet, and 
difficult to handle. I thought of a whole lot of knives, parallel in a rack, coming down and 
slicing the whole thing. I thought about this a long time, and finally I got the idea of wires 
in a rack. 

So I went to the five-and-ten to buy some knives or wires, and saw exactly the 
gadget I wanted: it was for slicing eggs. The next time the potatoes came out I got my 
little egg-slicer out and sliced all the potatoes in no time, and sent them back to the chef. 
The chef was a German, a great big guy who was King of the Kitchen, and he came 
storming out, blood vessels sticking out of his neck, livid red. "What's the matter with the 
potatoes?" he says. "They're not sliced!" 

I had them sliced, but they were all stuck together. He says, "How can I separate 

them?" 

"Stick 'em in water," I suggest. 

"IN WATER? EAGHHHHHHHHHHH!!!" 

Another time I had a really good idea. When I was desk clerk I had to answer the 
telephone. When a call came in, something buzzed, and a flap came down on the 
switchboard so you could tell which line it was. Sometimes, when I was helping the 
women with the bridge tables or sitting on the front porch in the middle of the afternoon 
(when there were very few calls), I’d be some distance from the switchboard when 
suddenly it would go. I’d come running to catch it, but the way the desk was made, in 
order to get to the switchboard you had to go quite a distance further down, then around, 
in behind, and then back up to see where the call was coming from — it took extra time. 

So I got a good idea. I tied threads to the flaps on the switchboard, and strung 
them over the top of the desk and then down, and at the end of each thread I tied a little 
piece of paper. Then I put the telephone talking piece up on top of the desk, so I could 
reach it from the front. Now, when a call came, I could tell which flap was down by 
which piece of paper was up, so I could answer the phone appropriately, from the front, 
to save time. Of course I still had to go around back to switch it in, but at least I was 
answering it. I’d say, "Just a moment," and then go around to switch it in. 

I thought that was perfect, but the boss came by one day, and she wanted to 
answer the phone, and she couldn’t figure it out — too complicated. "What are all these 
papers doing? Why is the telephone on this side? Why don't you. . . raaaaaaaa!" 

I tried to explain — it was my own aunt — that there was no reason not to do that, 



but you can't say that to anybody who's smart, who runs a hotel! I learned there that 
innovation is a very difficult thing in the real world. 


Who Stole the Door? 

At MIT the different fraternities all had "smokers" where they tried to get the new 
freshmen to be their pledges, and the summer before I went to MIT I was invited to a 
meeting in New York of Phi Beta Delta, a Jewish fraternity. In those days, if you were 
Jewish or brought up in a Jewish family, you didn’t have a chance in any other fraternity. 
Nobody else would look at you. I wasn’t particularly looking to be with other Jews, and 
the guys from the Phi Beta Delta fraternity didn’t care how Jewish I was — in fact, I didn’t 
believe anything about that stuff, and was certainly not in any way religious. Anyway, 
some guys from the fraternity asked me some questions and gave me a little bit of advice 
— that I ought to take the first-year calculus exam so I wouldn't have to take the course — 
which turned out to be good advice. I liked the fellas who came down to New York from 
the fraternity, and the two guys who talked me into it, I later became their roommate. 

There was another Jewish fraternity at MIT, called "SAM," and their idea was to 
give me a ride up to Boston and I could stay with them. I accepted the ride, and stayed 
upstairs in one of the rooms that first night. 

The next morning I looked out the window and saw the two guys from the other 
fraternity (that I met in New York) walking up the steps. Some guys from the Sigma 
Alpha Mu ran out to talk to them and there was a big discussion. 

I yelled out the window, "Hey, I’m supposed to be with those guys!" and I rushed 
out of the fraternity without realizing that they were all operating, competing for my 
pledge. I didn't have any feelings of gratitude for the ride, or anything. 

The Phi Beta Delta fraternity had almost collapsed the year before, because there 
were two different cliques that had split the fraternity in half. There was a group of 
socialite characters, who liked to have dances and fool around in their cars afterwards, 
and so on, and there was a group of guys who did nothing but study, and never went to 
the dances. 

Just before I came to the fraternity they had had a big meeting and had made an 
important compromise. They were going to get together and help each other out. 
Everyone had to have a grade level of at least such-and-such. If they were sliding behind, 
the guys who studied all the time would teach them and help them do their work. On the 
other side, everybody had to go to every dance. If a guy didn’t know how to get a date, 
the other guys would get him a date. If the guy didn’t know how to dance, they'd teach 
him to dance. One group was teaching the other how to think, while the other guys were 
teaching them how to be social. 

That was just right for me, because I was not very good socially. I was so timid 
that when I had to take the mail out and walk past some seniors sitting on the steps with 
some girls, I was petrified: I didn't know how to walk past them! And it didn’t help any 
when a girl would say, "Oh, he's cute!" 

It was only a little while after that the sophomores brought their girlfriends and 
their girlfriends' friends over to teach us to dance. Much later, one of the guys taught me 
how to drive his car. They worked very hard to get us intellectual characters to socialize 



and be more relaxed, and vice versa. It was a good balancing out. 

I had some difficulty understanding what exactly it meant to be "social." Soon 
after these social guys had taught me how to meet girls, I saw a nice waitress in a 
restaurant where I was eating by myself one day. With great effort I finally got up enough 
nerve to ask her to be my date at the next fraternity dance, and she said yes. 

Back at the fraternity, when we were talking about the dates for the next dance, I 
told the guys I didn’t need a date this time — I had found one on my own. I was very 
proud of myself. 

When the upperclassmen found out my date was a waitress, they were horrified. 
They told me that was not possible; they would get me a "proper" date. They made me 
feel as though I had strayed, that I was amiss. They decided to take over the situation. 
They went to the restaurant, found the waitress, talked her out of it, and got me another 
girl. They were trying to educate their "wayward son," so to speak, but they were wrong, 

I think. I was only a freshman then, and I didn’t have enough confidence yet to stop them 
from breaking my date. 

When I became a pledge they had various ways of hazing. One of the things they 
did was to take us, blindfolded, far out into the countryside in the dead of winter and 
leave us by a frozen lake about a hundred feet apart. We were in the middle of absolutely 
nowhere — no houses, no nothing — and we were supposed to find our way back to the 
fraternity. We were a little bit scared, because we were young, and we didn’t say much — 
except for one guy, whose name was Maurice Meyer: you couldn’t stop him from joking 
around, making dumb puns, and having this happy-go-lucky attitude of "Ha, ha, there's 
nothing to worry about. Isn't this fun!" 

We were getting mad at Maurice. He was always walking a little bit behind and 
laughing at the whole situation, while the rest of us didn’t know how we were ever going 
to get out of this. 

We came to an intersection not far from the lake — there were still no houses or 
anything — and the rest of us were discussing whether we should go this way or that way, 
when Maurice caught up to us and said, "Go this way." 

"What the hell do you know, Maurice?" we said, frustrated. "You're always 
making these jokes. Why should we go this way?" 

"Simple: Look at the telephone lines. Where there's more wires, it's going toward 
the central station." 

This guy, who looked like he wasn’t paying attention to anything, had come up 
with a terrific idea! We walked straight into town without making an error. 

On the following day there was going to be a schoolwide freshman versus 
sophomore mudeo (various forms of wrestling and tug of wars that take place in the 
mud). Late in the evening, into our fraternity comes a whole bunch of sophomores — 
some from our fraternity and some from outside — and they kidnap us: they want us to be 
tired the next day so they can win. 

The sophomores tied up all the freshmen relatively easily — except me. I didn’t 
want the guys in the fraternity to find out that I was a "sissy." (I was never any good in 
sports. I was always terrified if a tennis ball would come over the fence and land near me, 
because I never could get it over the fence — it usually went about a radian off of where it 
was supposed to go.) I figured this was a new situation, a new world, and I could make a 
new reputation. So in order that I wouldn't look like I didn’t kn ow how to fight, I fought 



like a son of a gun as best I could (not knowing what I was doing), and it took three or 
four guys many tries before they were finally able to tie me up. The sophomores took us 
to a house, far away in the woods, and tied us all down to a wooden floor with big U 
tacks. 

I tried all sorts of ways to escape, but there were sophomores guarding us, and 
none of my tricks worked. I remember distinctly one young man they were afraid to tie 
down because he was so terrified: his face was pale yellow-green and he was shaking. I 
found out later he was from Europe — this was in the early thirties — and he didn’t realize 
that these guys all tied down to the floor was some kind of a joke; he knew what kinds of 
things were going on in Europe. The guy was frightening to look at, he was so scared. 

By the time the night was over, there were only three sophomores guarding 
twenty of us freshmen, but we didn’t know that. The sophomores had driven their cars in 
and out a few times to make it sound as if there was a lot of activity, and we didn’t notice 
it was always the same cars and the same people. So we didn’t win that one. 

My father and mother happened to come up that morning to see how their son was 
doing in Boston, and the fraternity kept putting them off until we came back from being 
kidnapped. I was so bedraggled and dirty from struggling so hard to escape and from lack 
of sleep that they were really horrified to discover what their son looked l ik e at MIT! 

I had also gotten a stiff neck, and I remember standing in line for inspection that 
afternoon at ROTC, not being able to look straight forward. The commander grabbed my 
head and turned it, shouting, "Straighten up!" 

I winced, as my shoulders went at an angle: "I can’t help it, sir!" 

"Oh, excuse me!" he said, apologetically. 

Anyway, the fact that I fought so long and hard not to be tied up gave me a terrific 
reputation, and I never had to worry about that sissy business again — a tremendous 
relief. 


I often listened to my roommates — they were both seniors — studying for their 
theoretical physics course. One day they were working pretty hard on something that 
seemed pretty clear to me, so I said, "Why don’t you use the Baronallai’s equation?" 

"What's that!" they exclaimed. "What are you talking about!" 

I explained to them what I meant and how it worked in this case, and it solved the 
problem. It turned out it was Bernoulli’s equation that I meant, but I had read all this stuff 
in the encyclopedia without talking to anybody about it, so I didn't know how to 
pronounce anything. 

But my roommates were very excited, and from then on they discussed their 
physics problems with me — I wasn't so lucky with many of them — and the next year, 
when I took the course, I advanced rapidly. That was a very good way to get educated, 
working on the senior problems and learning how to pronounce things. 

I liked to go to a place called the Raymor and Playmore Ballroom — two 
ballrooms that were connected together — on Tuesday nights. My fraternity brothers 
didn't go to these "open" dances; they preferred their own dances, where the girls they 
brought were upper crust ones they had met "properly." I didn’t care, when I met 
somebody, where they were from, or what their background was, so I would go to these 
dances — even though my fraternity brothers disapproved (I was a junior by this time, and 
they couldn’t stop me) — and I had a very good time. 



One time I danced with a certain girl a few times, and didn’t say much. Finally, 
she said to me, "Who hants vewwy nice-ee." 

I couldn’t quite make it out — she had some difficulty in speech — but I thought 
she said, "You dance very nicely." 

"Thank you," I said. "It's been an honor." 

We went over to a table where a friend of hers had found a boy she was dancing 
with and we sat, the four of us, together. One girl was very hard of hearing, and the other 
girl was nearly deaf. 

When the two girls conversed they would do a large amount of signaling very 
rapidly back and forth, and grunt a little bit. It didn’t bother me; the girl danced well, and 
she was a nice person. 

After a few more dances, we’re sitting at the table again, and there's a large 
amount of signaling back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, until finally she says 
something to me which I gathered means, she’d like us to take them to some hotel. 

I ask the other guy if he wants to go. 

"What do they want us to go to this hotel/or?" he asks. 

"Hell, I don’t know. We didn’t talk well enough!" But I don't have to know. It's 
just fun, seeing what's going to happen; it's an adventure! 

The other guy's afraid, so he says no. So I take the two girls in a taxi to the hotel, 
and discover that there's a dance organized by the deaf and dumb, believe it or not. They 
all belonged to a club. It turns out many of them can feel the rhythm enough to dance to 
the music and applaud the band at the end of each number. 

It was very, very interesting! I felt as if I was in a foreign country and couldn’t 
speak the language: I could speak, but nobody could hear me. Everybody was talking 
with signs to everybody else, and I couldn’t understand anything! I asked my girl to teach 
me some signs and I learned a few, like you learn a foreign language, just for fun. 

Everyone was so happy and relaxed with each other, making jokes and smiling all 
the time; they didn’t seem to have any real difficulty of any kind communicating with 
each other. It was the same as with any other language, except for one thing: as they're 
making signs to each other, their heads were always turning from one side to the other. I 
realized what that was. When someone wants to make a side remark or interrupt you, he 
can't yell, "Hey, Jack!" He can only make a signal, which you won't catch unless you're in 
the habit of looking around all the time. 

They were completely comfortable with each other. It was my problem to be 
comfortable. It was a wonderful experience. 

The dance went on for a long time, and when it closed down we went to a 
cafeteria. They were all ordering things by pointing to them. I remember somebody 
asking in signs, "Where-are-you-from?" and my girl spelling out "N-e-w Y-o-r-k." I still 
remember a guy signing to me "Good sport!" — he holds his thumb up, and then touches 
an imaginary lapel, for "sport." It's a nice system. 

Everybody was sitting around, making jokes, and getting me into their world very 
nicely. I wanted to buy a bottle of milk, so I went up to the guy at the counter and 
mouthed the word "milk" without saying anything. 

The guy didn’t understand. 

I made the symbol for "milk," which is two fists moving as if you're milking a 
cow, and he didn’t catch that either. 



I tried to point to the sign that showed the price of milk, but he still didn't catch 
on. 

Finally, some stranger nearby ordered milk, and I pointed to it. 

"Oh! Milk!" he said, as I nodded my head yes. 

He handed me the bottle, and I said, "Thank you very much!" 

"You SON of a GUN!" he said, smiling. 

I often liked to play tricks on people when I was at MIT. One time, in mechanical 
drawing class, some joker picked up a French curve (a piece of plastic for drawing 
smooth curves — a curly, funny-looking thing) and said, "I wonder if the curves on this 
thing have some special formula?" 

I thought for a moment and said, "Sure they do. The curves are very special 
curves. Lemine show ya," and I picked up my French curve and began to turn it slowly. 
"The French curve is made so that at the lowest point on each curve, no matter how you 
turn it, the tangent is horizontal." 

All the guys in the class were holding their French curve up at different angles, 
holding their pencil up to it at the lowest point and laying it along, and discovering that, 
sure enough, the tangent is horizontal. They were all excited by this "discovery" — even 
though they had already gone through a certain amount of calculus and had already 
"learned" that the derivative (tangent) of the minimum (lowest point) of any curve is zero 
(horizontal). They didn’t put two and two together. They didn’t even know what they 
"knew." 

I don't know what's the matter with people: they don’t leam by understanding; 
they learn by some other way — by rote, or something. Their knowledge is so fragile! 

I did the same kind of trick four years later at Princeton when I was talking with 
an experienced character, an assistant of Einstein, who was surely working with gravity 
all the time. I gave him a problem: You blast off in a rocket which has a clock on board, 
and there's a clock on the ground. The idea is that you have to be back when the clock on 
the ground says one hour has passed. Now you want it so that when you come back, your 
clock is as far ahead as possible. According to Einstein, if you go very high, your clock 
will go faster, because the higher something is in a gravitational field, the faster its clock 
goes. But if you try to go too high, since you've only got an hour, you have to go so fast 
to get there that the speed slows your clock down. So you can't go too high. The question 
is, exactly what program of speed and height should you make so that you get the 
maximum time on your clock? 

This assistant of Einstein worked on it for quite a bit before he realized that the 
answer is the real motion of matter. If you shoot something up in a normal way, so that 
the time it takes the shell to go up and come down is an hour, that's the correct motion. 

It's the fundamental principle of Einstein's gravity — that is, what's called the "proper 
time" is at a maximum for the actual curve. But when I put it to him, about a rocket with 
a clock, he didn’t recognize it. It was just like the guys in mechanical drawing class, but 
this time it wasn’t dumb freshmen. So this kind of fragility is, in fact, fairly common, 
even with more learned people. 

When I was a junior or senior I used to eat at a certain restaurant in Boston. I went 
there by myself, often on successive evenings. People got to know me, and I had the 



same waitress all the time. 

I noticed that they were always in a hurry, rushing around, so one day, just for 
fun, I left my tip, which was usually ten cents (nonnal for those days), in two nickels, 
under two glasses: I fdled each glass to the very top, dropped a nickel in, and with a card 
over it, turned it over so it was upside down on the table. Then I slipped out the card (no 
water leaks out because no air can come in — the rim is too close to the table for that). 

I put the tip under two glasses because I knew they were always in a hurry. If the 
tip was a dime in one glass, the waitress, in her haste to get the table ready for the next 
customer, would pick up the glass, the water would spill out, and that would be the end of 
it. But after she does that with the first glass, what the hell is she going to do with the 
second one? She can’t just have the nerve to lift it up now! 

On the way out I said to my waitress, "Be careful, Sue. There's something funny 
about the glasses you gave me — they're filled in on the top, and there's a hole on the 
bottom!" 

The next day I came back, and I had a new waitress. My regular waitress wouldn’t 
have anything to do with me. "Sue's very angry at you," my new waitress said. "After she 
picked up the first glass and water went all over the place, she called the boss out. They 
studied it a little bit, but they couldn't spend all day figuring out what to do, so they 
finally picked up the other one, and water went out again, all over the floor. It was a 
terrible mess; Sue slipped later in the water. They're all mad at you." 

I laughed. 

She said, "It's not funny! How would you like it if someone did that to you — what 
would you do?" 

"I’d get a soup plate and then slide the glass very carefully over to the edge of the 
table, and let the water run into the soup plate — it doesn’t have to run onto the floor. 

Then I’d take the nickel out." 

"Oh, that's a goood idea," she said. 

That evening I left my tip under a coffee cup, which I left upside down on the 

table. 

The next night I came and I had the same new waitress. 

"What's the idea of leaving the cup upside down last time?" 

"Well, I thought that even though you were in a hurry, you'd have to go back into 
the kitchen and get a soup plate; then you'd have to sloooowly and carefully slide the cup 
over to the edge of the table. . ." 

"I did that," she complained, "but there was no water in it!" 

My masterpiece of mischief happened at the fraternity. One morning I woke up 
very early, about five o'clock, and couldn’t go back to sleep, so I went downstairs from 
the sleeping rooms and discovered some signs hanging on strings which said things like 
"DOOR! DOOR! WHO STOLE THE DOOR?" I saw that someone had taken a door off 
its hinges, and in its place they hung a sign that said, "PLEASE CLOSE THE DOOR!" — 
the sign that used to be on the door that was missing. 

I immediately figured out what the idea was. In that room a guy named Pete 
Bemays and a couple of other guys liked to work very hard, and always wanted it quiet. 

If you wandered into their room looking for something, or to ask them how they did 
problem such and such, when you would leave you would always hear these guys scream, 
"Please close the door!" 



Somebody had gotten tired of this, no doubt, and had taken the door off. Now this 
room, it so happened, had two doors, the way it was built, so I got an idea: I took the 
other door off its hinges, carried it downstairs, and hid it in the basement behind the oil 
tank. Then I quietly went back upstairs and went to bed. 

Later in the morning I made believe I woke up and came downstairs a little late. 
The other guys were milling around, and Pete and his friends were all upset: The doors to 
their room were missing, and they had to study, blah, blah, blah, blah. I was coming 
down the stairs and they said, "Feynman! Did you take the doors?" 

"Oh, yeah!" I said. "I took the door. You can see the scratches on my knuckles 
here, that I got when my hands scraped against the wall as I was carrying it down into the 
basement." 

They weren't satisfied with my answer; in fact, they didn’t believe me. 

The guys who took the first door had left so many clues — the handwriting on the 
signs, for instance — that they were soon found out. My idea was that when it was found 
out who stole the first door, everybody would think they also stole the other door. It 
worked perfectly: The guys who took the first door were pummeled and tortured and 
worked on by everybody, until finally, with much pain and difficulty, they convinced 
their tormentors that they had only taken one door, unbelievable as it might be. 

I listened to all this, and I was happy. 

The other door stayed missing for a whole week, and it became more and more 
important to the guys who were trying to study in that room that the other door be found. 

Finally, in order to solve the problem, the president of the fraternity says at the 
dinner table, "We have to solve this problem of the other door. I haven’t been able to 
solve the problem myself, so I would like suggestions from the rest of you as to how to 
straighten this out, because Pete and the others are trying to study." 

Somebody makes a suggestion, then someone else. 

After a little while, I get up and make a suggestion. "All right," I say in a sarcastic 
voice, "whoever you are who stole the door, we know you're wonderful. You're so clever! 
We can't figure out who you are, so you must be some sort of super-genius. You don't 
have to tell us who you are; all we want to know is where the door is. So if you will leave 
a note somewhere, telling us where the door is, we will honor you and admit forever that 
you are a super-marvel, that you are so smart that you could take the other door without 
our being able to figure out who you are. But for God’s sake, just leave the note 
somewhere, and we will be forever grateful to you for it." 

The next guy makes his suggestion: "I have another idea," he says. "I think that 
you, as president, should ask each man on his word of honor towards the fraternity to say 
whether he took the door or not." 

The president says, "That’s a very good idea. On the fraternity word of honor!" So 
he goes around the table, and asks each guy, one by one: "Jack, did vow take the door?" 

"No, sir, I did not take the door." 

"Tim: Did vow take the door?" 

"No, sir! I did not take the door!" 

"Maurice. Did you take the door?" 

"No, I did not take the door, sir." 

"Feynman, did vow take the door?" 

"Yeah, / took the door." 



"Cut it out, Feynman; this is serious! Sam! Did vow take the door. . — it went all 

the way around. Everyone was shocked. There must be some real rat in the fraternity who 
didn't respect the fraternity word of honor! 

That night I left a note with a little picture of the oil tank and the door next to it, 
and the next day they found the door and put it back. 

Sometime later I finally admitted to taking the other door, and I was accused by 
everybody of lying. They couldn’t remember what I had said. All they could remember 
was their conclusion after the president of the fraternity had gone around the table and 
asked everybody, that nobody admitted taking the door. The idea they remembered, but 
not the words. 

People often think I'm a faker, but I'm usually honest, in a certain way — in 
such a way that often nobody believes me! 


Latin or Italian? 

There was an Italian radio station in Brooklyn, and as a boy I used to listen to it 
all the time. I LOVed the ROLLing SOUNds going over me, as if I was in the ocean, and 
the waves weren’t very high. I used to sit there and have the water come over me, in this 
BEAUtiful iTALian. In the Italian programs there was always some kind of family situa¬ 
tion where there were discussions and arguments between the mother and father: 

High voice: "Nio teco TIEto capeto TUtto. . ." 

Loud, low voice: "DRO tone pala TUtto!!” (with hand slapping). 

It was great! So I learned to make all these emotions: I could cry; I could laugh; 
all this stuff. Italian is a lovely language. 

There were a number of Italian people living near us in New York. Once while I 
was riding my bicycle, some Italian truck driver got upset at me, leaned out of his truck, 
and, gesturing, yelled something like, "Me aRRUcha LAMpe etta TIche!" 

I felt like a crapper. What did he say to me? What should I yell back? 

So I asked an Italian friend of mine at school, and he said, "Just say, A te! A te!' — 
which means 'The same to you! The same to you!' " 

I thought it was a great idea. I would say "A te! A te!” back-gesturing, of course. 
Then, as I gained confidence, I developed my abilities further. I would be riding my 
bicycle, and some lady would be driving in her car and get in the way, and I’d say, 

"PUzzia a la maLOche!" — and she’d shrink! Some terrible Italian boy had cursed a 
terrible curse at her! 

It was not so easy to recognize it as fake Italian. Once, when I was at Princeton, as 
I was going into the parking lot at Palmer Laboratory on my bicycle, somebody got in the 
way. My habit was always the same: I gesture to the guy, "oREzze caBONca MIche!", 
slapping the back of one hand against the other. 

And way up on the other side of a long area of grass, there's an Italian gardner 
putting in some plants. He stops, waves, and shouts happily, ”REzza ma Lla!" 

I call back, ”RONte BALta!", returning the greeting. He didn’t know I didn’t know, 
and I didn’t know what he said, and he didn’t know what I said. But it was OK! It was 
great! It works! After all, when they hear the intonation, they recognize it immediately as 
Italian — maybe it's Milano instead of Romano, what the hell. But he's an iTALian! So it's 



just great. But you have to have absolute confidence. Keep right on going, and nothing 
will happen. 

One time I came home from college for a vacation, and my sister was sort of 
unhappy, almost crying: her Girl Scouts were having a father-daughter banquet, but our 
father was out on the road, selling uniforms. So I said I would take her, being the brother 
(I'm nine years older, so it wasn't so crazy). 

When we got there, I sat among the fathers for a while, but soon became sick of 
them. All these fathers bring their daughters to this nice little banquet, and all they talked 
about was the stock market — they don’t know how to talk to their own children, much 
less their children's friends. 

During the banquet the girls entertained us by doing little skits, reciting poetry, 
and so on. Then all of a sudden they bring out this funny-looking apronlike thing, with a 
hole at the top to put your head through. The girls announce that the fathers are now 
going to entertain them. 

So each father has to get up and stick his head through and say something — one 
guy recites "Mary Had a Little Lamb" — and they don't kn ow what to do. I didn't know 
what to do either, but by the time I got up there, I told them that I was going to recite a 
little poem, and I'm sorry that it's not in English, but I'm sure they will appreciate it 
anyway: 


A TUZZO LANTO 
-Poici di Pare 

TANto SAca TULna TI, na PUta TUchi PUti Tl la. 

RUNto CAta CHANtp CHANta MANto CHI la Tl da. 

YALta CAra SULda MI la CHAta PIcha Pino Tito BRALda 

pe te CHIna nan a CHUNda Ida CHIN da Ida CHUN dal 
RONto piti CA le, a TANto CHINto quinta LALda 
O la TINta dalla LALta, YENta PUcha lalia TALta! 

I do this for three or four stanzas, going through all the emotions that I heard on 
Italian radio, and the kids are unraveled, rolling in the aisles, laughing with happiness. 

After the banquet was over, the scoutmaster and a schoolteacher came over and 
told me they had been discussing my poem. One of them thought it was Italian, and the 
other thought it was Latin. The schoolteacher asks, "Which one of us is right?" 

I said, "You'll have to go ask the girls — they understood what language it was 
right away." 


Always Trying to Escape 

When I was a student at MIT I was interested only in science; I was no good at 
anything else. But at MIT there was a rule: You have to take some humanities courses to 
get more "culture." Besides the English classes required were two electives, so I looked 
through the list, and right away I found astronomy — as a humanities course! So that year 
I escaped with astronomy. Then next year I looked further down the list, past French 
literature and courses like that, and found philosophy. It was the closest thing to science I 



could find. 

Before I tell you what happened in philosophy, let me tell you about the English 
class. We had to write a number of themes. For instance, Mill had written something on 
liberty, and we had to criticize it. But instead of addressing myself to political liberty, as 
Mill did, I wrote about liberty in social occasions — the problem of having to fake and he 
in order to be polite, and does this perpetual game of faking in social situations lead to the 
"destruction of the moral fiber of society." An interesting question, but not the one we 
were supposed to discuss. 

Another essay we had to criticize was by Huxley, "On a Piece of Chalk," in which 
he describes how an ordinary piece of chalk he is holding is the remains from animal 
bones, and the forces inside the earth lifted it up so that it became part of the White 
Cliffs, and then it was quarried and is now used to convey ideas through writing on the 
blackboard. 

But again, instead of criticizing the essay assigned to us, I wrote a parody called, 
"On a Piece of Dust," about how dust makes the colors of the sunset and precipitates the 
rain, and so on. I was always a faker, always trying to escape. 

But when we had to write a theme on Goethe's Faust, it was hopeless! The work 
was too long to make a parody of it or to invent something else. I was storming back and 
forth in the fraternity saying, "I can't do it. I'm just not gonna do it. I ain’t gonna do it!" 

One of my fraternity brothers said, "OK, Feynman, you're not gonna do it. But the 
professor will think you didn’t do it because you don’t want to do the work. You oughta 
write a theme on something — same number of words — and hand it in with a note saying 
that you just couldn’t understand the Faust, you haven't got the heart for it, and that it's 
impossible for you to write a theme on it." 

So I did that. I wrote a long theme, "On the Fimitations of Reason." I had thought 
about scientific techniques for solving problems, and how there are certain limitations: 
moral values cannot be decided by scientific methods, yak, yak, yak, and so on. 

Then another fraternity brother offered some more advice. "Feynman," he said, "it 
ain’t gonna work, handing in a theme that's got nothing to do with Faust. What you 
oughta do is work that thing you wrote into the Faust. " 

"Ridiculous!" I said. 

But the other fraternity guys think it's a good idea. 

"All right, all right!" I say, protesting. "I'll try." 

So I added half a page to what I had already written, and said that Mephistopheles 
represents reason, and Faust represents the spirit, and Goethe is trying to show the 
limitations of reason. I stirred it up, cranked it all in, and handed in my theme. 

The professor had us each come in individually to discuss our theme. I went in 
expecting the worst. 

He said, "The introductory material is fine, but the Faust material is a bit too 
brief. Otherwise, it's very good — B+ ." I escaped again! 

Now to the philosophy class. The course was taught by an old bearded professor 
named Robinson, who always mumbled. I would go to the class, and he would mumble 
along, and I couldn’t understand a thing. The other people in the class seemed to 
understand him better, but they didn't seem to pay any attention. I happened to have a 
small drill, about one-sixteenth-inch, and to pass the time in that class, I would twist it 
between my fingers and drill holes in the sole of my shoe, week after week. 



Finally one day at the end of the class, Professor Robinson went "wugga mugga 
mugga wugga wugga. . and everybody got excited! They were all talking to each other 
and discussing, so I figured he’d said something interesting, thank God! I wondered what 
it was? 

I asked somebody, and they said, "We have to write a theme, and hand it in in 
four weeks." 

"A theme on what?" 

"On what he’s been talking about all year." 

I was stuck. The only thing that I had heard during that entire tenn that I could 
remember was a moment when there came this upwelling, 

"muggawuggastreamofconsciousnessmugga wugga," and phoom! — it sank back into 
chaos. 

This "stream of consciousness" reminded me of a problem my father had given to 
me many years before. He said, "Suppose some Martians were to come down to earth, 
and Martians never slept, but instead were perpetually active. Suppose they didn’t have 
this crazy phenomenon that we have, called sleep. So they ask you the question: 'How 
does it feel to go to sleep? What happens when you go to sleep? Do your thoughts 
suddenly stop, or do they move less aanndd lleeessss 

rraaaaapppppiidddddllllllllyyyyyyyyyyyyyy? How does the mind actually turn off?" 

I got interested. Now I had to answer this question: How does the stream of 
consciousness end, when you go to sleep? 

So every afternoon for the next four weeks I would work on my theme. I would 
pull down the shades in my room, turn off the lights, and go to sleep. And I’d watch what 
happened, when I went to sleep. 

Then at night, I’d go to sleep again, so I had two times each day when I could 
make observations — it was very good! 

At first I noticed a lot of subsidiary things that had little to do with falling asleep. 

I noticed, for instance, that I did a lot of thinking by speaking to myself internally. I could 
also imagine things visually. 

Then, when I was getting tired, I noticed that I could think of two things at once. I 
discovered this when I was talking internally to myself about something, and while I was 
doing this, I was idly imagining two ropes connected to the end of my bed, going through 
some pulleys, and winding around a turning cylinder, slowly lifting the bed. I wasn’t 
aware that I was imagining these ropes until I began to worry that one rope would catch 
on the other rope, and they wouldn’t wind up smoothly. But I said, internally, "Oh, the 
tension will take care of that," and this interrupted the first thought I was having, and 
made me aware that I was thinking of two things at once. 

I also noticed that as you go to sleep the ideas continue, but they become less and 
less logically interconnected. You don’t notice that they're not logically connected until 
you ask yourself, "What made me think of that?" and you try to work your way back, and 
often you can’t remember what the hell did make you think of that! 

So you get every illusion of logical connection, but the actual fact is that the 
thoughts become more and more cockeyed until they're completely disjointed, and 
beyond that, you fall asleep. 

After four weeks of sleeping all the time, I wrote my theme, and explained the 
observations I had made. At the end of the theme I pointed out that all of these 



observations were made while I was watching myself fall asleep, and I don’t really know 
what it's l ik e to fall asleep when I'm not watching myself. I concluded the theme with a 
little verse I made up, which pointed out this problem of introspection: 

I wonder why. I wonder why. 

I wonder why I wonder. 

I wonder why I wonder why 

I wonder why I wonder! 

We hand in our themes, and the next time our class meets, the professor reads one 
of them: "Mum bum wugga mum bum. . ." I can't tell what the guy wrote. 

He reads another theme: "Mugga wugga mum bum wugga wugga. . ." I don't 
know what that guy wrote either, but at the end of it, he goes: 

Uh wugga wuh. Uh wugga wuh. 

Uh wugga wugga wugga. 

I wugga wuh uh wugga wuh 

Uh wugga wugga wugga. 

"Aha!" I say. "That's my theme!" I honestly didn’t recognize it until the end. 

After I had written the theme I continued to be curious, and I kept practicing this 
watching myself as I went to sleep. One night, while I was having a dream, I realized I 
was observing myself in the dream. I had gotten all the way down, into the sleep itself! 

In the first part of the dream I'm on top of a train and we’re approaching a tunnel. I 
get scared, pull myself down, and we go into the tunnel — whoosh! I say to myself, "So 
you can get the feeling of fear, and you can hear the sound change when you go into the 
tunnel." 

I also noticed that I could see colors. Some people had said that you dream in 
black and white, but no, I was dreaming in color. 

By this time I was inside one of the train cars, and I can feel the train lurching 
about. I say to myself, "So you can get kinesthetic feelings in a dream." I walk with some 
difficulty down to the end of the car, and I see a big window, like a store window. Behind 
it there are — not mannequins, but three live girls in bathing suits, and they look pretty 
good! 

I continue walking into the next car, hanging onto the straps overhead as I go, 
when I say to myself, "Hey! It would be interesting to get excited — sexually — so I think 
I'll go back into the other car." I discovered that I could turn around, and walk back 
through the train — I could control the direction of my dream. I get back to the car with 
the special window, and I see three old guys playing violins — but they turned back into 
girls! So I could modify the direction of my dream, but not perfectly. 

Well, I began to get excited, intellectually as well as sexually, saying things like, 
"Wow! It's working!" and I woke up. 

I made some other observations while dreaming. Apart from always asking 
myself, "Am I really dreaming in color?" I wondered, "How accurately do you see 
something?" 

The next time I had a dream, there was a girl lying in tall grass, and she had red 



hair. I tried to see if I could see each hair. You know how there’s a little area of color just 
where the sun is reflecting — the diffraction effect, I could see that! I could see each hair 
as sharp as you want: perfect vision! 

Another time I had a dream in which a thumbtack was stuck in a doorframe. I see 
the tack, run my fingers down the doorframe, and I feel the tack. So the "seeing 
department" arid the "feeling department" of the brain seem to be connected. Then I say 
to myself, Could it be that they don't have to be connected? I look at the doorframe again, 
and there's no thumbtack. I run my finger down the doorframe, and l feel the tack! 

Another time I'm dreaming and I hear "knock-knock; knock-knock." Something 
was happening in the dream that made this knocking fit, but not perfectly — it seemed 
sort of foreign. I thought: "Absolutely guaranteed that this knocking is coming from 
outside my dream, and I've invented this part of the dream to fit with it. I've got to wake 
up and find out what the hell it is." 

The knocking is still going, I wake up, and. . . Dead silence. There was nothing. 

So it wasn’t connected to the outside. 

Other people have told me that they have incorporated external noises into their 
dreams, but when I had this experience, carefully "watching from below," and sure the 
noise was coming from outside the dream, it wasn't. 

During the time of making observations in my dreams, the process of waking up 
was a rather fearful one. As you're beginning to wake up there's a moment when you feel 
rigid and tied down, or underneath many layers of cotton batting. It's hard to explain, but 
there's a moment when you get the feeling you can't get out; you're not sure you can wake 
up. So I would have to tell myself — after I was awake — that that's ridiculous. There's no 
disease I know of where a person falls asleep naturally and can’t wake up. You can 
always wake up. And after talking to myself many times like that, I became less and less 
afraid, and in fact I found the process of waking up rather thrilling — something like a 
roller coaster: After a while you're not so scared, and you begin to enjoy it a little bit. 

You might l ik e to know how this process of observing my dreams stopped (which 
it has for the most part; it's happened just a few times since). I'm dreaming one night as 
usual, making observations, and I see on the wall in front of me a pennant. I answer for 
the twenty-fifth time, "Yes, I'm dreaming in color," and then I realize that I’ve been 
sleeping with the back of my head against a brass rod. I put my hand behind my head and 
I feel that the back of my head is soft. I think, "Aha! That's why I've been able to make all 
these observations in my dreams: the brass rod has disturbed my visual cortex. All I have 
to do is sleep with a brass rod under my head, and I can make these observations any time 
I want. So I think I'll stop making observations on this one, and go into deeper sleep." 

When I woke up later, there was no brass rod, nor was the back of my head soft. 
Somehow I had become tired of making these observations, and my brain had invented 
some false reasons as to why I shouldn’t do it any more. 

As a result of these observations I began to get a little theory. One of the reasons 
that I liked to look at dreams was that I was curious as to how you can see an image, of a 
person, for example, when your eyes are closed, and nothing's coming in. You say it 
might be random, irregular nerve discharges, but you can't get the nerves to discharge in 
exactly the same delicate patterns when you are sleeping as when you are awake, looking 
at something. Well then, how could I "see" in color, and in better detail, when I was 
asleep? 



I decided there must be an "interpretation department." When you are actually 
looking at something — a man, a lamp, or a wall — you don’t just see blotches of color. 
Something tells you what it is; it has to be interpreted. When you're dreaming, this 
interpretation department is still operating, but it's all slopped up. It's telling you that 
you're seeing a human hair in the greatest detail, when it isn’t true. It's interpreting the 
random junk entering the brain as a clear image. 

One other thing about dreams. I had a friend named Deutsch, whose wife was 
from a family of psychoanalysts in Vienna. One evening, during a long discussion about 
dreams, he told me that dreams have significance: there are symbols in dreams that can 
be interpreted psychoanalytically. I didn’t believe most of this stuff, but that night I had 
an interesting dream: We’re playing a game on a billiard table with three balls — a white 
ball, a green ball, and a gray ball — and the name of the game is "titsies." There was 
something about trying to get the balls into the pocket: the white ball and the green ball 
are easy to sink into the pocket, but the gray one, I can't get to it. 

I wake up, and the dream is very easy to interpret: the name of the game gives it 
away, of course — them's girls! The white ball was easy to figure out, because I was 
going out, sneakily, with a married woman who worked at the time as a cashier in a 
cafeteria and wore a white uniform. The green one was also easy, because I had gone out 
about two nights before to a drive-in movie with a girl in a green dress. But the gray one - 
- what the hell was the gray one? I knew it had to be somebody; l felt it. It's like when 
you're trying to remember a name, and it's on the tip of your tongue, but you can't get it. 

It took me half a day before I remembered that I had said goodbye to a girl I liked 
very much, who had gone to Italy about two or three months before. She was a very nice 
girl, and I had decided that when she came back I was going to see her again. I don’t 
know if she wore a gray suit, but it was perfectly clear, as soon as I thought of her, that 
she was the gray one. 

I went back to my friend Deutsch, and I told him he must be right — there is 
something to analyzing dreams. But when he heard about my interesting dream, he said, 
"No, that one was too perfect — too cut and dried. Usually you have to do a bit more 
analysis." 


The Chief Research Chemist of the Metaplast Corporation 

After I finished at MIT I wanted to get a summer job. I had applied two or three 
times to the Bell Labs, and had gone out a few times to visit. Bill Shockley, who knew 
me from the lab at MIT, would show me around each time, and I enjoyed those visits 
terrifically, but I never got a job there. 

I had letters from some of my professors to two specific companies. One was to 
the Bausch and Lomb Company for tracing rays through lenses; the other was to 
Electrical Testing Labs in New York. At that time nobody knew what a physicist even 
was, and there weren't any positions in industry for physicists. Engineers, OK; but 
physicists — nobody knew how to use them. It's interesting that very soon, after the war, 
it was the exact opposite: people wanted physicists everywhere. So I wasn’t getting 
anywhere as a physicist looking for a job late in the Depression. 

About that time I met an old friend of mine on the beach at our home town of Far 



Rockaway, where we grew up together. We had gone to school together when we were 
about eleven or twelve, and were very good friends. We were both scientifically minded. 
He had a "laboratory," and I had a "laboratory." We often played together, and discussed 
things together. 

We used to put on magic shows — chemistry magic — for the kids on the block. 
My friend was a pretty good showman, and I kind of l ik ed that too. We did our tricks on 
a little table, with Bunsen burners at each end going all the time. On the burners we had 
watch glass plates (flat glass discs) with iodine on them, which made a beautiful purple 
vapor that went up on each side of the table while the show went on. It was great! We did 
a lot of tricks, such as turning "wine" into water, and other chemical color changes. For 
our finale, we did a trick that used something which we had discovered. I would put my 
hands (secretly) first into a sink of water, and then into benzine. Then I would 
"accidentally" brush by one of the Bunsen burners, and one hand would light up. I’d clap 
my hands, and both hands would then be burning. (It doesn’t hurt because it burns fast 
and the water keeps it cool.) Then I’d wave my hands, running around yelling, "FIRE! 
FIRE!" and everybody would get all excited. They'd run out of the room, and that was the 
end of the show! 

Later on I told this story at college to my fraternity brothers and they said, 
"Nonsense! You can't do that!" 

(I often had this problem of demonstrating to these fellas something that they 
didn't believe — like the time we got into an argument as to whether urine just ran out of 
you by gravity, and I had to demonstrate that that wasn’t the case by showing them that 
you can pee standing on your head. Or the time when somebody claimed that if you took 
aspirin and Coca-Cola you’d fall over in a dead faint directly. I told them I thought it was 
a lot of baloney, and offered to take aspirin and Coca-Cola together. Then they got into 
an argument whether you should have the aspirin before the Coke, just after the Coke, or 
mixed in the Coke. So I had six aspirin and three Cokes, one right after the other. First, I 
took aspirins and then a Coke, then we dissolved two aspirins in a Coke and I took that, 
and then I took a Coke and two aspirins. Each time the idiots who believed it were 
standing around me, waiting to catch me when I fainted. But nothing happened. I do 
remember that I didn’t sleep very well that night, so I got up and did a lot of figuring, and 
worked out some of the formulas for what is called the Riemann-Zeta function.) 

"All right, guys," I said. "Let's go out and get some benzine." 

They got the benzine ready, I stuck my hand in the water in the sink and then into 
the benzine and lit it. . . and it hurt like hell! You see, in the meantime I had grown hairs 
on the back of my hand, which acted like wicks and held the benzine in place while it 
burned, whereas when I had done it earlier I had no hairs on the back of my hand. After I 
did the experiment for my fraternity brothers, I didn’t have any hairs on the back of my 
hands either. 

Well, my pal and I met on the beach, and he told me that he had a process for 
metal-plating plastics. I said that was impossible, because there's no conductivity; you 
can't attach a wire. But he said he could metal-plate anything, and I still remember him 
picking up a peach pit that was in the sand, and saying he could metal-plate that — trying 
to impress me. 

What was nice was that he offered me a job at his little company, which was on 
the top floor of a building in New York. There were only about four people in the 



company. His father was the one who was getting the money together and was, I think, 
the "president." He was the "vice-president," along with another fella who was a 
salesman. I was the "chief research chemist," and my friend's brother, who was not very 
clever, was the bottle-washer. We had six metal-plating baths. 

They had this process for metal-plating plastics, and the scheme was: First, 
deposit silver on the object by precipitating silver from a silver nitrate bath with a 
reducing agent (like you make mirrors); then stick the object, with silver on it as a 
conductor, into an electroplating bath, and the silver gets plated. 

The problem was, does the silver stick to the object? 

It doesn't. It peels off easily. So there was a step in between, to make the silver 
stick better to the object. It depended on the material. For things like Bakelite, which was 
an important plastic in those days, my friend had found that if he sandblasted it first, and 
then soaked it for many hours in stannous hydroxide, which got into the pores of the 
Bakelite, the silver would hold onto the surface very nicely. 

But it worked only on a few plastics, and new kinds of plastics were coming out 
all the time, such as methyl methac-rylate (which we call plexiglass, now), that we 
couldn’t plate, directly, at first. And cellulose acetate, which was very cheap, was another 
one we couldn’t plate at first, though we finally discovered that putting it in sodium 
hydroxide for a little while before using the stannous chloride made it plate very well. 

I was pretty successful as a "chemist" in the company. My advantage was that my 
pal had done no chemistry at all; he had done no experiments; he just knew how to do 
something once. I set to work putting lots of different knobs in bottles, and putting all 
kinds of chemicals in. By trying everything and keeping track of everything I found ways 
of plating a wider range of plastics than he had done before. 

I was also able to simplify his process. From looking in books I changed the 
reducing agent from glucose to formaldehyde, and was able to recover 100 percent of the 
silver immediately, instead of having to recover the silver left in solution at a later time. 

I also got the stannous hydroxide to dissolve in water by adding a little bit of 
hydrochloric acid — something I remembered from a college chemistry course — so a step 
that used to take hours now took about five minutes. 

My experiments were always being interrupted by the salesman, who would come 
back with some plastic from a prospective customer. I’d have all these bottles lined up, 
with everything marked, when all of a sudden, "You gotta stop the experiment to do a 
'super job' for the sales department!" So, a lot of experiments had to be started more than 
once. 

One time we got into one hell of a lot of trouble. There was some artist who was 
trying to make a picture for the cover of a magazine about automobiles. He had very 
carefully built a wheel out of plastic, and somehow or other this salesman had told him 
we could plate anything, so the artist wanted us to metal-plate the hub, so it would be a 
shiny, silver hub. The wheel was made of a new plastic that we didn't kn ow very well 
how to plate — the fact is, the salesman never knew what we could plate, so he was 
always promising things — and it didn't work the first time. So, to fix it up we had to get 
the old silver off, and we couldn’t get it off easily. I decided to use concentrated nitric 
acid on it, which took the silver off all right, but also made pits and holes in the plastic. 
We were really in hot water that time! In fact, we had lots of "hot water" experiments. 

The other fellas in the company decided we should run advertisements in Modern 



Plastics magazine. A few things we metal-plated were very pretty. They looked good in 
the advertisements. We also had a few things out in a showcase in front, for prospective 
customers to look at, but nobody could pick up the things in the advertisements or in the 
showcase to see how well the plating stayed on. Perhaps some of them were, in fact, 
pretty good jobs. But they were made specially; they were not regular products. 

Right after I left the company at the end of the summer to go to Princeton, they 
got a good offer from somebody who wanted to metal-plate plastic pens. Now people 
could have silver pens that were light, and easy, and cheap. The pens immediately sold, 
all over, and it was rather exciting to see people walking around everywhere with these 
pens — and you knew where they came from. 

But the company hadn’t had much experience with the material — or perhaps with 
the filler that was used in the plastic (most plastics aren’t pure; they have a "filler," which 
in those days wasn't very well controlled) — and the dam things would develop a blister. 
When you have something in your hand that has a little blister that starts to peel, you 
can't help fiddling with it. So everybody was fiddling with all the peelings coming off the 
pens. 

Now the company had this emergency problem to fix the pens, and my pal 
decided he needed a big microscope, and so on. He didn’t know what he was going to 
look at, or why, and it cost his company a lot of money for this fake research. The result 
was, they had trouble: They never solved the problem, and the company failed, because 
their first big job was such a failure. 

A few years later I was in Los Alamos, where there was a man named Frederic de 
Hoflinan, who was a sort of scientist; but more, he was also very good at administrating. 
Not highly trained, he liked mathematics, and worked very hard; he compensated for his 
lack of training by hard work. Later he became the president or vice president of General 
Atomics and he was a big industrial character after that. But at the time he was just a very 
energetic, open-eyed, enthusiastic boy, helping along with the Project as best he could. 

One day we were eating at the Fuller Lodge, and he told me he had been working 
in England before coming to Los Alamos. 

"What kind of work were you doing there?" I asked. 

"I was working on a process for metal-plating plastics. I was one of the guys in 
the laboratory." 

"How did it go?" 

"It was going along pretty well, but we had our problems." 

"Oh?" 

"Just as we were beginning to develop our process, there was a company in New 
York. . ." 

"What company in New York?” 

"It was called the Metaplast Corporation. They were developing further than we 

were." 

"How could you tell?" 

"They were advertising all the time in Modern Plastics with full-page 
advertisements showing all the things they could plate, and we realized that they were 
further along than we were." 

"Did you have any stuff from them?" 

"No, but you could tell from the advertisements that they were way ahead of what 



we could do. Our process was pretty good, but it was no use trying to compete with an 
American process l ik e that." 

"How many chemists did you have working in the lab?" 

"We had six chemists working." 

"How many chemists do you think the Metaplast Corporation had?" 

"Oh! They must have had a real chemistry department!" 

"Would you describe for me what you think the chief research chemist at the 
Metaplast Corporation might look like, and how his laboratory might work?" 

"I would guess they must have twenty-five or fifty chemists, and the chief 
research chemist has his own office — special, with glass. You know, like they have in 
the movies — guys coming in all the time with research projects that they're doing, getting 
his advice, and rushing off to do more research, people coming in and out all the time. 
With twenty-five or fifty chemists, how the hell could we compete with them?" 

"You'll be interested and amused to know that you are now talking to the chief 
research chemist of the Metaplast Corporation, whose staff consisted of one bottle- 
washer! " 
