"Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!"
by Richard P. Feynman 

Part 5 

The World of One Physicist 


Would You Solve the Dirac Equation? 

Near the end of the year I was in Brazil I received a letter from Professor Wheeler 
which said that there was going to be an international meeting of theoretical physicists in 
Japan, and might I like to go? Japan had some famous physicists before the war — 
Professor Yukawa, with a Nobel prize, Tomonaga, and Nishina — but this was the first 
sign of Japan coming back to life after the war, and we all thought we ought to go and 
help them along. 

Wheeler enclosed an army phrasebook and wrote that it would be nice if we 
would all learn a little Japanese. I found a Japanese woman in Brazil to help me with the 
pronunciation, I practiced lifting little pieces of paper with chopsticks, and I read a lot 
about Japan. At that time, Japan was very mysterious to me, and I thought it would be 
interesting to go to such a strange and wonderful country, so I worked very hard. 

When we got there, we were met at the airport and taken to a hotel in Tokyo 
designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. It was an imitation of a European hotel, right down to 
the little guy dressed in an outfit l ik e the Philip Morris guy. We weren’t in Japan; we 
might as well have been in Europe or America! The guy who showed us to our rooms 
stalled around, pulling the shades up and down, waiting for a tip. Everything was just like 
America. 

Our hosts had everything organized. That first night we were served dinner up at 
the top of the hotel by a woman dressed Japanese, but the menus were in English. I had 
gone to a lot of trouble to learn a few phrases in Japanese, so near the end of the meal, I 
said to the waitress, "Kohi-o motte kite kudasai. " She bowed and walked away. 

My friend Marshak did a double take: "What? What?" 

"I talk Japanese," I said, 

"Oh, you faker! You're always kidding around, Feynman." 

"What are you talkin' about?" I said, in a serious tone. 

"OK," he said. "What did you ask?" 

"I asked her to bring us coffee." 

Marshak didn’t believe me. "I’ll make a bet with you," he said. "If she brings us 



coffee. . 

The waitress appeared with our coffee, and Marshak lost his bet. 

It turned out I was the only guy who had learned some Japanese — even Wheeler, 
who had told everybody they ought to leam Japanese, hadn’t learned any — and I couldn’t 
stand it any more. I had read about the Japanese-style hotels, which were supposed to be 
very different from the hotel we were staying in. 

The next morning I called the Japanese guy who was organizing everything up to 
my room. "I would like to stay in a Japanese-style hotel." 

"I am afraid that it is impossible, Professor Feynman." 

I had read that the Japanese are very polite, but very obstinate: You have to keep 
working on them. So I decided to be as obstinate as they, and equally polite. It was a 
battle of minds: It took thirty minutes, back and forth. 

"Why do you want to go to a Japanese-style hotel?" 

"Because in this hotel, I don’t feel like I'm in Japan." 

"Japanese-style hotels are no good. You have to sleep on the floor." 

"That's what I want; I want to see how it is." 

"And there are no chairs — you sit on the floor at the table." 

"It's OK. That will be delightful. That's what I'm looking for." 

Finally he owns up to what the situation is: "If you're in another hotel, the bus will 
have to make an extra stop on its way to the meeting." 

"No, no!" I say. "In the morning. I'll come to this hotel, and get on the bus here." 

"Well, then, OK. That’s fine." That’s all there was to it — except it took half an 
hour to get to the real problem. 

He's walking over to the telephone to make a call to the other hotel when 
suddenly he stops; everything is blocked up again. It takes another fifteen minutes to 
discover that this time it's the mail. If there are any messages from the meeting, they 
already have it arranged where to deliver them. 

"It's OK," I say. "When I come in the morning to get the bus, I'll look for any 
messages for me here at this hotel." 

"All right. That’s fine." He gets on the telephone and at last we’re on our way to 
the Japanese-style hotel. 

As soon as I got there, I knew it was worth it: It was so lovely! There was a place 
at the front where you take your shoes off, then a girl dressed in the traditional outfit — 
the obi — with sandals comes shuffling out, and takes your stuff; you follow her down a 
hallway which has mats on the floor, past sliding doors made of paper, and she's going 
cht-cht-cht-cht with little steps. It was all very wonderful! 

We went into my room and the guy who arranged everything got all the way 
down, prostrated, and touched his nose to the floor; she got down and touched her nose to 
the floor. I felt very awkward. Should / touch my nose to the floor, too? 

They said greetings to each other, he accepted the room for me, and went out. It 
was a really wonderful room. There were all the regular, standard things that you know 
of now, but it was all new to me. There was a little alcove with a painting in it, a vase 
with pussywillows nicely arranged, a table along the floor with a cushion nearby, and at 
the end of the room were two sliding doors which opened onto a garden. 

The lady who was supposed to take care of me was a middle-aged woman. She 
helped me undress and gave me a yukata, a simple blue and white robe, to wear at the 



hotel. 


I pushed open the doors and admired the lovely garden, and sat down at the table 
to do a little work. 

I wasn’t there more than fifteen or twenty minutes when something caught my 
eye. I looked up, out towards the garden, and I saw, sitting at the entrance to the door, 
draped in the corner, a very beautiful young Japanese woman, in a most lovely outfit. 

I had read a lot about the customs of Japan, and I had an idea of why she was sent 
to my room. I thought, "This might be very interesting!" 

She knew a little English. "Would you rike to see the garden?" she asked. 

I put on the shoes that went with the yukata I was wearing, and we went out into 
the garden. She took my arm and showed me everything. 

It turned out that because she knew a little English, the hotel manager thought I 
would l ik e her to show me the garden — that's all it was. I was a bit disappointed, of 
course, but this was a meeting of cultures, and I knew it was easy to get the wrong idea. 

Sometime later the woman who took care of my room came in and said something 
— in Japanese — about a bath. I knew that Japanese baths were interesting and was eager 
to try it, so I said, "Hai. ” 

I had read that Japanese baths are very complicated. They use a lot of water that's 
heated from the outside, and you aren’t supposed to get soap into the bathwater and spoil 
it for the next guy. 

I got up and walked into the lavatory section, where the sink was, and I could hear 
some guy in the next section with the door closed, taking a bath. Suddenly the door slides 
open: the man taking the bath looks to see who is intruding. "Professor!" he says to me in 
English. "That's a very bad error to go into the lavatory when someone else has the bath!" 
It was Professor Yukawa! 

He told me that the woman had no doubt asked do I want a bath, and if so, she 
would get it ready for me and tell me when the bathroom was free. But of all the people 
in the world to make that serious social error with, I was lucky it was Professor Yukawa! 

That Japanese-style hotel was delightful, especially when people came to see me 
there. The other guys would come in to my room and we’d sit on the floor and start to 
talk. We wouldn’t be there more than five minutes when the woman who took care of my 
room would come in with a tray of candies and tea. It was as if you were a host in your 
own home, and the hotel staff was helping you to entertain your guests. Here, when you 
have guests at your hotel room, nobody cares; you have to call up for service, and so on. 

Eating meals at the hotel was also different. The girl who brings in the food stays 
with you while you eat, so you're not alone. I couldn’t have too good a conversation with 
her, but it was all right. And the food is wonderful. For instance, the soup comes in a 
bowl that's covered. You lift the cover and there's a beautiful picture: little pieces of 
onion floating in the soup just so; it's gorgeous. How the food looks on the plate is very 
important. 

I had decided that I was going to live Japanese as much as I could. That meant 
eating fish. I never liked fish when I was growing up, but I found out in Japan that it was 
a childish thing: I ate a lot of fish, and enjoyed it. (When I went back to the United States 
the first thing I did was go to a fish place. It was horrible — just l ik e it was before. I 
couldn’t stand it. I later discovered the answer: The fish has to be very, very fresh — if it 
isn't, it gets a certain taste that bothers me.) 



One time when I was eating at the Japanese-style hotel I was served a round, hard 
thing, about the size of an egg yolk, in a cup of some yellow liquid. So far I had eaten 
everything in Japan, but this thing frightened me: it was all convoluted, like a brain looks. 
When I asked the girl what it was, she replied "kuri. " That didn’t help much. I figured it 
was probably an octopus egg, or something. I ate it, with some trepidation, because I 
wanted to be as much in Japan as possible. (I also remembered the word "kuri” as if my 
life depended on it — I haven’t forgotten it in thirty years:) 

The next day I asked a Japanese guy at the conference what this convoluted thing 
was. I told him I had found it very difficult to eat. What the hell was "kuri"? 

"It means 'chestnut,' " he replied. 

Some of the Japanese I had learned had quite an effect. One time, when the bus 
was taking a long time to get started, some guy says, "Hey, Feynman! You know 
Japanese; tell ’em to get going!" 

I said, "Hayaku! Hayaku! Ikimasho! Ikimasho!" — which means, "Let's go! Let's 
go! Hurry! Hurry!" 

I realized my Japanese was out of control. I had learned these phrases from a 
military phrase book, and they must have been very rude, because everyone at the hotel 
began to scurry like mice, saying, "Yes, sir! Yes sir!" and the bus left right away. 

The meeting in Japan was in two parts: one was in Tokyo, and the other was in 
Kyoto. In the bus on the way to Kyoto I told my friend Abraham Pais about the Japanese- 
style hotel, and he wanted to try it. We stayed at the Hotel Miyako, which had both 
American-style and Japanese-style rooms, and Pais shared a Japanese-style room with 
me. 

The next morning the young woman taking care of our room fixes the bath, which 
was right in our room. Sometime later she returns with a tray to deliver breakfast. I'm 
partly dressed. She turns to me and says, politely, "Ohayo, gozai masu," which means, 
"Good morning." 

Pais is just coming out of the bath, sopping wet and completely nude. She turns to 
him and with equal composure says, "Ohayo, gozai masu," and puts the tray down for us. 

Pais looks at me and says, "God, are we uncivilized!" We realized that in America 
if the maid was delivering breakfast and the guy's standing there, stark naked, there 
would be little screams and a big fuss. But in Japan they were completely used to it, and 
we felt that they were much more advanced and civilized about those things than we 
were. 


I had been working at that time on the theory of liquid helium, and had figured 
out how the laws of quantum dynamics explain the strange phenomena of super-fluidity. I 
was very proud of this achievement, and was going to give a talk about my work at the 
Kyoto meeting. 

The night before I gave my talk there was a dinner, and the man who sat down 
next to me was none other than Professor Onsager, a topnotch expert in solid-state 
physics and the problems of liquid helium. He was one of these guys who doesn’t say 
very much, but any time he said anything, it was significant. 

"Well, Feynman," he said in a gruff voice, "I hear you think you have understood 
liquid helium." 



"Well, yes. . 

"Hoompf." And that's all he said to me during the whole dinner! So that wasn’t 
much encouragement. 

The next day I gave my talk and explained all about liquid helium. At the end, I 
complained that there was still something I hadn’t been able to figure out: that is, whether 
the transition between one phase and the other phase of liquid helium was first-order (like 
when a solid melts or a liquid boils — the temperature is constant) or second-order (like 
you see sometimes in magnetism, in which the temperature keeps changing). 

Then Professor Onsager got up and said in a dour voice, "Well, Professor 
Feynman is new in our field, and I think he needs to be educated. There's something he 
ought to know, and we should tell him." 

I thought, "Geesus! What did I do wrong?" 

Onsager said, "We should tell Feynman that nobody has ever figured out the order 
of any transition correctly from first principles. . . so the fact that his theory does not 
allow him to work out the order correctly does not mean that he hasn’t understood all the 
other aspects of liquid helium satisfactorily." It turned out to be a compliment, but from 
the way he started out, I thought I was really going to get it! 

It wasn’t more than a day later when I was in my room and the telephone rang. It 
was Time magazine. The guy on the line said, "We're very interested in your work. Do 
you have a copy of it you could send us?" 

I had never been in Time and was very excited. I was proud of my work, which 
had been received well at the meeting, so I said, "Sure!" 

"Fine. Please send it to our Tokyo bureau." The guy gave me the address. I was 
feeling great. 

I repeated the address, and the guy said, "That's right. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Pais." 

"Oh, no!" I said, startled. "I'm not Pais; it's Pais you want? Excuse me. I'll tell him 
that you want to speak to him when he comes back." 

A few hours later Pais came in: "Hey, Pais! Pais!" I said, in an excited voice. 

"Time magazine called! They want you to send ’em a copy of the paper you're giving." 

"Aw!" he says. "Publicity is a whore!" 

I was doubly taken aback. 

I've since found out that Pais was right, but in those days, I thought it would be 
wonderful to have my name in Time magazine. 

That was the first time I was in Japan. I was eager to go back, and said I would go 
to any university they wanted me to. So the Japanese arranged a whole series of places to 
visit for a few days at a time. 

By this time I was married to Mary Lou, and we were entertained wherever we 
went. At one place they put on a whole ceremony with dancing, usually performed only 
for larger groups of tourists, especially for us. At another place we were met right at the 
boat by all the students. At another place, the mayor met us. 

One particular place we stayed was a little, modest place in the woods, where the 
emperor would stay when he came by. It was a very lovely place, surrounded by woods, 
just beautiful, the stream selected with care. It had a certain calmness, a quiet elegance. 
That the emperor would go to such a place to stay showed a greater sensitivity to nature, I 
think, than what we were used to in the West. 



At all these places everybody working in physics would tell me what they were 
doing and I’d discuss it with them. They would tell me the general problem they were 
working on, and would begin to write a bunch of equations. 

"Wait a minute," I would say, "Is there a particular example of this general 
problem?" 

"Why yes; of course." 

"Good. Give me one example." That was for me: I can't understand anything in 
general unless I'm carrying along in my mind a specific example and watching it go. 

Some people think in the beginning that I'm kind of slow and I don't understand the 
problem, because I ask a lot of these "dumb" questions: "Is a cathode plus or minus? Is an 
an ion this way, or that way?" 

But later, when the guy's in the middle of a bunch of equations, he’ll say 
something and I’ll say, "Wait a minute! There’s an error! That can't be right!" 

The guy looks at his equations, and sure enough, after a while, he finds the 
mistake and wonders, "How the hell did this guy, who hardly understood at the 
beginning, find that mistake in the mess of all these equations?" 

He thinks I'm following the steps mathematically, but that's not what I'm doing. I 
have the specific, physical example of what he's trying to analyze, and I know from 
instinct and experience the properties of the thing. So when the equation says it should 
behave so-and-so, and I know that's the wrong way around, I jump up and say, "Wait! 
There's a mistake!" 

So in Japan I couldn’t understand or discuss anybody's work unless they could 
give me a physical example, and most of them couldn't find one. Of those who could, it 
was often a weak example, one which could be solved by a much simpler method of 
analysis. 

Since I was perpetually asking not for mathematical equations, but for physical 
circumstances of what they were trying to work out, my visit was summarized in a 
mimeographed paper circulated among the scientists (it was a modest but effective 
system of communication they had cooked up after the war) with the title, "Feynman's 
Bombardments, and Our Reactions." 

After visiting a number of universities I spent some months at the Yukawa 
Institute in Kyoto. I really enjoyed working there. Everything was so nice: You'd come to 
work, take your shoes off, and someone would come and serve you tea in the morning 
when you felt like it. It was very pleasant. 

While in Kyoto I tried to learn Japanese with a vengeance. I worked much harder 
at it, and got to a point where I could go around in taxis and do things. I took lessons 
from a Japanese man every day for an hour. 

One day he was teaching me the word for "see." 

"All right," he said. "You want to say, 'May I see your garden?’ What do you 

say?" 

I made up a sentence with the word that I had just learned. 

"No, no!" he said. "When you say to someone, 'Would you like to see my garden? 
you use the first 'see.' But when you want to see someone else's garden, you must use 
another 'see,' which is more polite." 

"Would you like to glance at my lousy garden?" is essentially what you're saying 
in the first case, but when you want to look at the other fella’s garden, you have to say 



something like, "May I observe your gorgeous garden?" So there’s two different words 
you have to use. 

Then he gave me another one: "You go to a temple, and you want to look at the 
gardens. . ." 

I made up a sentence, this time with the polite "see." 

"No, no!" he said. "In the temple, the gardens are much more elegant. So you 
have to say something that would be equivalent to 'May I hang my eyes on your most 
exquisite gardens?' 

Three or four different words for one idea, because when I'm doing it, it's 
miserable; when you're doing it, it's elegant. 

I was learning Japanese mainly for technical things, so I decided to check if this 
same problem existed among the scientists. 

At the institute the next day, I said to the guys in the office, "How would I say in 
Japanese, 'I solve the Dirac Equation’?" 

They said such-and-so. 

"OK. Now I want to say, 'Would vow solve the Dirac Equation?' — how do I say 

that?" 

"Well, you have to use a different word for 'solve,' " they say. 

"Why?" I protested. "When / solve it, I do the same damn thing as when vow solve 
it!" 

"Well, yes, but it's a different word — it's more polite." 

I gave up. I decided that wasn’t the language for me, and stopped learning 
Japanese. 


The 7 Percent Solution 

The problem was to find the right laws of beta decay. There appeared to be two 
particles, which were called a tau and a theta. They seemed to have almost exactly the 
same mass, but one disintegrated into two pions, and the other into three pions. Not only 
did they seem to have the same mass, but they also had the same lifetime, which is a 
funny coincidence. So everybody was concerned about this. 

At a meeting I went to, it was reported that when these two particles were 
produced in a cyclotron at different angles and different energies, they were always pro¬ 
duced in the same proportions — so many taus compared to so many thetas. 

Now; one possibility, of course, was that it was the same particle, which 
sometimes decayed into two pions, and sometimes into three pions. But nobody would 
allow that, because there is a law called the parity rule, which is based on the assumption 
that all the laws of physics are mirror-image-symmetrical, and says that a thing that can 
go into two pions can't also go into three pions. 

At that particular time I was not really quite up to things: I was always a little 
behind. Everybody seemed to be smart, and I didn’t feel I was keeping up. Anyway, I was 
sharing a room with a guy named Martin Block, an experimenter. And one evening he 
said to me, "Why are you guys so insistent on this parity rule? Maybe the tau and theta 
are the same particle. What would be the consequences if the parity rule were wrong?" 

I thought a minute and said, "It would mean that nature's laws are different for the 



right hand and the left hand, that there's a way to define the right hand by physical 
phenomena. I don’t know that that's so terrible, though there must be some bad 
consequences of that, but I don't know. Why don't you ask the experts tomorrow?" 

He said, "No, they won’t listen to me. You ask." 

So the next day, at the meeting, when we were discussing the tau-theta puzzle, 
Oppenheimer said, "We need to hear some new, wilder ideas about this problem." 

So I got up and said, "I'm asking this question for Martin Block: What would be 
the consequences if the parity rule was wrong?" 

Murray Gell-Mann often teased me about this, saying I didn’t have the nerve to 
ask the question for myself. But that's not the reason. I thought it might very well be an 
important idea. 

Lee, of Lee and Yang, answered something complicated, and as usual I didn’t 
understand very well. At the end of the meeting, Block asked me what he said, and I said 
I didn't know, but as far as I could tell, it was still open — there was still a possibility. I 
didn't think it was likely, but I thought it was possible. 

Norm Ramsey asked me if I thought he should do an experiment looking for 
parity law violation, and I replied, "The best way to explain it is, I'll bet you only fifty to 
one you don't find anything." 

He said, "That's good enough for me." But he never did the experiment. 

Anyway, the discovery of parity law violation was made, experimentally, by Wu, 
and this opened up a whole bunch of new possibilities for beta decay theory. It also 
unleashed a whole host of experiments immediately after that. Some showed electrons 
coming out of the nuclei spun to the left, and some to the right, and there were all kinds 
of experiments, all kinds of interesting discoveries about parity. But the data were so 
confusing that nobody could put things together. 

At one point there was a meeting in Rochester — the yearly Rochester Conference. 
I was still always behind, and Lee was giving his paper on the violation of parity. He and 
Yang had come to the conclusion that parity was violated, and now he was giving the 
theory for it. 

During the conference I was staying with my sister in Syracuse. I brought the 
paper home and said to her, "I can't understand these things that Lee and Yang are saying. 
It's all so complicated." 

"No," she' said, "what you mean is not that you can't understand it, but that you 
didn't invent it. You didn’t figure it out your own way, from hearing the clue. What you 
should do is imagine you're a student again, and take this paper upstairs, read every line 
of it, and check the equations. Then you'll understand it very easily." 

I took her advice, and checked through the whole thing, and found it to be very 
obvious and simple. I had been afraid to read it, thinking it was too difficult. 

It reminded me of something I had done a long time ago with left and right 
unsymmetrical equations. Now it became kind of clear, when I looked at Lee's formulas, 
that the solution to it all was much simpler: Everything comes out coupled to the left. For 
the electron and the muon, my predictions were the same as Lee's, except I changed some 
signs around. I didn’t realize it at the time, but Lee had taken only the simplest example 
of muon coupling, and hadn’t proved that all muons would be full to the right, whereas 
according to my theory, all muons would have to be full automatically. Therefore, I had, 



in fact, a prediction on top of what he had. I had different signs, but I didn’t realize that I 
also had this quantity right. 

I predicted a few things that nobody had experiments for yet, but when it came to 
the neutron and proton, I couldn’t make it fit well with what was then known about 
neutron and proton coupling: it was kind of messy. 

The next day, when I went back to the meeting, a very kind man named Ken 
Case, who was going to give a paper on something, gave me five minutes of his allotted 
time to present my idea. I said I was convinced that everything was coupled to the left, 
and that the signs for the electron and muon are reversed, but I was struggling with the 
neutron. Later the experimenters asked me some questions about my predictions, and 
then I went to Brazil for the summer. 

When I came back to the United States, I wanted to know what the situation was 
with beta decay. I went to Professor Wu's laboratory at Columbia, and she wasn't there, 
spinning to the left in the beta decay, came out on the right in some cases. Nothing fit 
anything. When I got back to Caltech, I asked some of the experimenters what the 
situation was with beta decay. I remember three guys, Hans Jensen, Aaldert Wapstra, and 
Felix Boehm, sitting me down on a little stool, and starting to tell me all these facts: 
experimental results from other parts of the country, and their own experimental results. 
Since I knew those guys, and how careful they were, I paid more attention to their results 
than to the others. Their results, alone, were not so inconsistent; it was all the others plus 
theirs. 

Finally they get all this stuff into me, and they say, "The situation is so mixed up 
that even some of the things they've established for years are being questioned — such as 
the beta decay of the neutron is S and T. It’s so messed up. Murray says it might even be 
V and A." 

I jump up from the stool and say, "Then I understand EVVVVVERYTHING!" 

They thought I was joking. But the thing that I had trouble with at the Rochester 
meeting — the neutron and proton disintegration: everything fit but that, and if it was V 
and A instead of S and T, that would fit too. Therefore I had the whole theory! 

That night I calculated all kinds of things with this theory. The first thing I 
calculated was the rate of disintegration of the muon and the neutron. They should be 
connected together, if this theory was right, by a certain relationship, and it was right to 9 
percent. That’s pretty close, 9 percent. It should have been more perfect than that, but it 
was close enough. 

I went on and checked some other things, which fit, and new things fit, new things 
fit, and I was very excited. It was the first time, and the only time, in my career that I 
knew a law of nature that nobody else knew. (Of course it wasn't true, but finding out 
later that at least Murray Gell-Mann — and also Sudarshan and Marshak — had worked 
out the same theory didn’t spoil my fun.) 

The other things I had done before were to take somebody else's theory and 
improve the method of calculating, or take an equation, such as the Schrodinger 
Equation, to explain a phenomenon, such as helium. We know the equation, and we know 
the phenomenon, but how does it work? 

I thought about Dirac, who had his equation for a while — a new equation which 
told how an electron behaved — and I had this new equation for beta decay, which wasn’t 
as vital as the Dirac Equation, but it was good. It's the only time I ever discovered a new 



law. 


I called up my sister in New York to thank her for getting me to sit down and 
work through that paper by Lee and Yang at the Rochester Conference. After feeling 
uncomfortable and behind, now I was in; I had made a discovery, just from what she 
suggested. I was able to enter physics again, so to speak, and I wanted to thank her for 
that. I told her that everything fit, except for the 9 percent. 

I was very excited, and kept on calculating, and things that fit kept on tumbling 
out: they fit automatically, without a strain. I had begun to forget about the 9 percent by 
now, because everything else was coming out right. 

I worked very hard into the night, sitting at a small table in the kitchen next to a 
window. It was getting later and later — about 2:00 or 3:00 A.M. I'm working hard, 
getting all these calculations packed solid with things that fit, and I'm thinking, and 
concentrating, and it's dark, and it's quiet. . . when suddenly there's a TAC-TAC-TAC- 
TAC — loud, on the window. I look, and there's this white face, right at the window, only 
inches away, and I scream with shock and surprise! 

It was a lady I knew who was angry at me because I had come back from vacation 
and didn’t immediately call her up to tell her I was back. I let her in, and tried to explain 
that I was just now very busy, that I had just discovered something, and it was very 
important. I said, "Please go out and let me finish it." 

She said, "No, I don’t want to bother you. I'll just sit here in the living room." 

I said, "Well, all right, but it's very difficult." She didn't exactly sit in the living 
room. The best way to say it is she sort of squatted in a corner, holding her hands 
together, not wanting to "bother" me. Of course her purpose was to bother the hell out of 
me! And she succeeded — I couldn't ignore her. I got very angry and upset, and I couldn’t 
stand it. I had to do this calculating; I was making a big discovery and was terribly 
excited, and somehow, it was more important to me than this lady — at least at that 
moment. I don’t remember how I finally got her out of there, but it was very difficult. 

After working some more, it got to be very late at night, and I was hungry. I 
walked up the main street to a little restaurant five or ten blocks away, as I had often done 
before, late at night. 

On early occasions I was often stopped by the police, because I would be walking 
along, thinking, and then I’d stop — sometimes an idea comes that's difficult enough that 
you can’t keep walking; you have to make sure of something. So I’d stop, and sometimes 
I’d hold my hands out in the air, saying to myself, "The distance between these is that 
way, and then this would turn over this way. . ." 

I’d be moving my hands, standing in the street, when the police would come: 
"What is your name? Where do you live? What are you doing?" 

"Oh! I was thinking. I'm sorry; I live here, and go often to the restaurant. . ." After 
a bit they knew who it was, and they didn’t stop me any more. 

So I went to the restaurant, and while I'm eating I'm so excited that I tell a lady 
that I just made a discovery. She starts in: She's the wife of a fireman, or forester, or 
something. She’s very lonely — all this stuff that I'm not interested in. So that happens. 

The next morning when I got to work I went to Wapstra, Boehm, and Jensen, and 
told them, "I've got it all worked out. Everything fits." 

Christy, who was there, too, said, "What beta-decay constant did you use?" 



"The one from So-and-So's book." 

"But that's been found out to be wrong. Recent measurements have shown it's off 
by 7 percent." 

Then I remember the 9 percent. It was like a prediction for me: I went home and 
got this theory that says the neutron decay should be off by 9 percent, and they tell me the 
next morning that, as a matter of fact, it's 7 percent changed. But is it changed from 9 to 
16, which is bad, or from 9 to 2, which is good? 

Just then my sister calls from New York: "How about the 9 percent — what’s 
happened?" 

"I've just discovered that there's new data: 7 percent. . ." 

"Which way?” 

"I'm trying to find out. I'll call you back." 

I was so excited that I couldn’t think. It’s like when you're rushing for an airplane, 
and you don't know whether you're late or not, and you just can't make it, when 
somebody says, "It's daylight saving time!" Yes, but which way? You can't think in the 
excitement. 

So Christy went into one room, and I went into another room, each of us to be 
quiet, so we could think it through: This moves this way, and that moves that way — it 
wasn’t very difficult, really; it's just exciting. 

Christy came out, and I came out, and we both agreed: It's 2 percent, which is 
well within experimental error. After all, if they just changed the constant by 7 percent, 
the 2 percent could have been an error. I called my sister back: "Two percent." The 
theory was right. 

(Actually, it was wrong: it was off, really, by 1 percent, for a reason we hadn’t 
appreciated, which was only understood later by Nicola Cabibbo. So that 2 percent was 
not all experimental.) 

Murray Gell-Mann compared and combined our ideas and wrote a paper on the 
theory. The theory was rather neat; it was relatively simple, and it fit a lot of stuff. But as 
I told you, there was an awful lot of chaotic data. And in some cases, we even went so far 
as to state that the experiments were in error. 

A good example of this was an experiment by Valentine Telegdi, in which he 
measured the number of electrons that go out in each direction when a neutron 
disintegrates. Our theory had predicted that the number should be the same in all 
directions, whereas Telegdi found that 11 percent more came out in one direction than the 
others. Telegdi was an excellent experimenter, and very careful. And once, when he was 
giving a talk somewhere, he referred to our theory and said, "The trouble with theorists 
is, they never pay attention to the experiments!" 

Telegdi also sent us a letter, which wasn’t exactly scathing, but nevertheless 
showed he was convinced that our theory was wrong. At the end he wrote, "The F-G 
(Feynman-Gell-Mann) theory of beta decay is no F-G." 

Murray says, "What should we do about this? You know, Telegdi's pretty good." 

I say, "We just wait." 

Two days later there's another letter from Telegdi. He's a complete convert. He 
found out from our theory that he had disregarded the possibility that the proton recoiling 
from the neutron is not the same in all directions. He had assumed it was the same. By 
putting in corrections that our theory predicted instead of the ones he had been using, the 



results straightened out and were in complete agreement. 

I knew that Telegdi was excellent, and it would be hard to go upstream against 
him. But I was convinced by that time that something must be wrong with his 
experiment, and that he would find it — he's much better at finding it than we would be. 
That's why I said we shouldn’t try to figure it out but just wait. 

I went to Professor Bacher and told him about our success, and he said, "Yes, you 
come out and say that the neutron-proton coupling is V instead of T. Everybody used to 
think it was T. Where is the fundamental experiment that says it's T? Why don’t you look 
at the early experiments and find out what was wrong with them?" 

I went out and found the original article on the experiment that said the neutron- 
proton coupling is T, and I was shocked by something. I remembered reading that article 
once before (back in the days when I read every article in the Physical Review — it was 
small enough). And I remembered when I saw this article again, looking at that curve 
and thinking, "That doesn’t prove anything!” 

You see, it depended on one or two points at the very edge of the range of the 
data, and there's a principle that a point on the edge of the range of the data — the last 
point — isn't very good, because if it was, they'd have another point further along. And I 
had realized that the whole idea that neutron-proton coupling is T was based on the last 
point, which wasn’t very good, and therefore it's not proved. I remember noticing that! 

And when I became interested in beta decay, directly, I read all these reports by 
the "beta-decay experts," which said it's T. I never looked at the original data; I only read 
those reports, like a dope. Had I been a good physicist, when I thought of the original 
idea back at the Rochester Conference I would have immediately looked up "how strong 
do we know it's T?" — that would have been the sensible thing to do. I would have 
recognized right away that I had already noticed it wasn’t satisfactorily proved. 

Since then I never pay any attention to anything by "experts." I calculate 
everything myself. When people said the quark theory was pretty good, I got two Ph.D.s, 
Finn Ravndal and Mark Kislinger, to go through the whole works with me, just so I could 
check that the thing was really giving results that fit fairly well, and that it was a 
significantly good theory. I'll never make that mistake again, reading the experts' 
opinions. Of course, you only live one life, and you make all your mistakes, and learn 
what not to do, and that's the end of you. 


Thirteen Times 

One time a science teacher from the local city college came around and asked me 
if I’d give a talk there. He offered me fifty dollars, but I told him I wasn't worried about 
the money. "That's the city college, right?" 

"Yes." 

I thought about how much paperwork I usually had to get involved with when I 
deal with the government, so I laughed and said, "I’ll be glad to give the talk. There's only 
one condition on the whole thing" — I pulled a number out of a hat and continued — "that 
I don’t have to sign my name more than thirteen times, and that includes the check!" 

The guy laughs too. "Thirteen times! No problem." 

So then it starts. First I have to sign something that says I'm loyal to the 



government, or else I can't talk in the city college. And I have to sign it double, OK? 
Then I have to sign some kind of release to the city — I can’t remember what. Pretty soon 
the numbers are beginning to climb up. 

I have to sign that I was suitably employed as a professor — to ensure, of course, 
since it's a city thing, that no jerk at the other end was hiring his wife or a friend to come 
and not even give the lecture. There were all kinds of things to ensure, and the signatures 
kept mounting. 

Well, the guy who started out laughing got pretty nervous, but we just made it. I 
signed exactly twelve times. There was one more left for the check, so I went ahead and 
gave the talk. 

A few days later the guy came around to give me the check, and he was really 
sweating. He couldn’t give me the money unless I signed a form saying I really gave the 
talk. 

I said, "If I sign the form, I can't sign the check. But vow were there. You heard 
the talk; why don’t you sign it?" 

"Look," he said, "Isn't this whole thing rather silly?" 

"No. It was an arrangement we made in the beginning. We didn’t think it was 
really going to get to thirteen, but we agreed on it, and I think we should stick to it to the 
end." 

He said, "I've been working very hard, calling all around. I’ve been trying 
everything, and they tell me it's impossible. You simply can't get your money unless you 
sign the form." 

"It's OK," I said. "I've only signed twelve times, and I gave the talk. I don't need 
the money." 

"But I hate to do this to you." 

"It's all right. We made a deal; don’t worry." 

The next day he called me up. "They can’t not give you the money! They've 
already earmarked the money and they've got it set aside, so they have to give it to you!" 

"OK, if they have to give me the money, let them give me the money." 

"But you have to sign the form." 

"I won't sign the form!" 

They were stuck. There was no miscellaneous pot which was for money that this 
man deserves but won’t sign for. 

Finally, it got straightened out. It took a long time, and it was very complicated — 
but I used the thirteenth signature to cash my check. 


It Sounds Greek to Me! 

I don't know why, but I’m always very careless, when I go on a trip, about the 
address or telephone number or anything of the people who invited me. I figure I'll be 
met, or somebody else will know where we’re going; it’ll get straightened out somehow. 

One time, in 1957,1 went to a gravity conference at the University of North 
Carolina. I was supposed to be an expert in a different field who looks at gravity. 

I landed at the airport a day late for the conference (I couldn’t make it the first 
day), and I went out to where the taxis were. I said to the dispatcher, "I’d like to go to the 



University of North Carolina." 

"Which do you mean," he said, "the State University of North Carolina at Raleigh, 
or the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill?" 

Needless to say, I hadn’t the slightest idea. "Where are they?" I asked, figuring 
that one must be near the other. 

"One's north of here, and the other is south of here, about the same distance." 

I had nothing with me that showed which one it was, and there was nobody else 
going to the conference a day late like I was. 

That gave me an idea. "Listen," I said to the dispatcher. "The main meeting began 
yesterday, so there were a whole lot of guys going to the meeting who must have come 
through here yesterday. Let me describe them to you: They would have their heads kind 
of in the air, and they would be talking to each other, not paying attention to where they 
were going, saying things to each other, like 'G-mu-nu. G-mu-nu.' " 

His face lit up. "Ah, yes," he said. "You mean Chapel Hill!" He called the next 
taxi waiting in line. "Take this man to the university at Chapel Hill." 

"Thank you," I said, and I went to the conference. 


But Is It Art? 

Once I was at a party playing bongos, and I got going pretty well. One of the guys 
was particularly inspired by the drumming. He went into the bathroom, took off his shirt, 
smeared shaving cream in funny designs all over his chest, and came out dancing wildly, 
with cherries hanging from his ears. Naturally, this crazy nut and I became good friends 
right away. His name is Jerry Zorthian; he's an artist. 

We often had long discussions about art and science. I'd say things like, "Artists 
are lost: they don’t have any subject! They used to have the religious subjects, but they 
lost their religion and now they haven't got anything. They don’t understand the technical 
world they live in; they don't know anything about the beauty of the real world — the 
scientific world — so they don’t have anything in their hearts to paint." 

Jerry would reply that artists don’t need to have a physical subject; there are many 
emotions that can be expressed through art. Besides, art can be abstract. Furthermore, 
scientists destroy the beauty of nature when they pick it apart and turn it into 
mathematical equations. 

One time I was over at Jerry's for his birthday, and one of these dopey arguments 
lasted until 3:00 A.M. The next morning I called him up: "Listen, Jerry," I said, "the 
reason we have these arguments that never get anywhere is that you don’t know a damn 
thing about science, and I don't know a damn thing about art. So, on alternate Sundays, 

I'll give you a lesson in science, and you give me a lesson in art." 

"OK," he said. "I'll teach you how to draw." 

"That will be impossible," I said, because when I was in high school, the only 
thing I could draw was pyramids on deserts — consisting mainly of straight lines — and 
from time to time I would attempt a palm tree and put in a sun. I had absolutely no talent. 
I sat next to a guy who was equally adept. When he was permitted to draw anything, it 
consisted of two flat, elliptical blobs, l ik e tires stacked on one another, with a stalk 
coming out of the top, culminating in a green triangle. It was supposed to be a tree. So I 



bet Jerry that he wouldn’t be able to teach me to draw. 

"Of course you'll have to work," he said. 

I promised to work, but still bet that he couldn't teach me to draw. I wanted very 
much to learn to draw, for a reason that I kept to myself: I wanted to convey an emotion I 
have about the beauty of the world. It’s difficult to describe because it's an emotion. It’s 
analogous to the feeling one has in religion that has to do with a god that controls 
everything in the whole universe: there's a generality aspect that you feel when you think 
about how things that appear so different and behave so differently are all run "behind the 
scenes" by the same organization, the same physical laws. It's an appreciation of the 
mathematical beauty of nature, of how she works inside; a realization that the phenomena 
we see result from the complexity of the inner workings between atoms; a feeling of how 
dramatic and wonderful it is. It's a feeling of awe — of scientific awe — which I felt could 
be communicated through a drawing to someone who had also had this emotion. It could 
remind him, for a moment, of this feeling about the glories of the universe. 

Jerry turned out to be a very good teacher. He told me first to go home and draw 
anything. So I tried to draw a shoe; then I tried to draw a flower in a pot. It was a mess! 

The next time we met I showed him my attempts: "Oh, look!" he said. "You see, 
around in back here, the line of the flower pot doesn't touch the leaf." (I had meant the 
line to come up to the leaf.) "That's very good. It’s a way of showing depth. That’s very 
clever of you." 

"And the fact that you don’t make all the lines the same thickness (which I didn't 
mean to do) is good. A drawing with all the lines the same thickness is dull." It continued 
like that: Everything that I thought was a mistake, he used to teach me something in a 
positive way. He never said it was wrong; he never put me down. So I kept on trying, and 
I gradually got a little bit better, but I was never satisfied. 

To get more practice I also signed up for a correspondence school course, with 
International Correspondence Schools, and I must say they were good. They started me 
off drawing pyramids and cylinders, shading them and so on. We covered many areas: 
drawing, pastels, watercolors, and paints. Near the end I petered out: I made an oil 
painting for them, but I never sent it in. They kept sending me letters urging me to 
continue. They were very good. 

I practiced drawing all the time, and became very interested in it. If I was at a 
meeting that wasn’t getting anywhere — like the one where Carl Rogers came to Caltech 
to discuss with us whether Caltech should develop a psychology department — I would 
draw the other people. I had a little pad of paper I kept with me and I practiced drawing 
wherever I went. So, as Jerry taught me, I worked very hard. 

Jerry, on the other hand, didn’t learn much physics. His mind wandered too easily. 
I tried to teach him something about electricity and magnetism, but as soon as I 
mentioned "electricity," he’d tell me about some motor he had that didn’t work, and how 
might he fix it. When I tried to show him how an electromagnet works by making a little 
coil of wire and hanging a nail on a piece of string, I put the voltage on, the nail swung 
into the coil, and Jerry said, "Ooh! It's just like fucking!" So that was the end of that. 

So now we have a new argument-whether he's a better teacher than I was, or I'm a 
better student than he was. 

I gave up the idea of trying to get an artist to appreciate the feeling I had about 
nature so he could portray it. I would now have to double my efforts in learning to draw 



so I could do it myself. It was a very ambitious undertaking, and I kept the idea entirely 
to myself, because the odds were I would never be able to do it. 

Early on in the process of learning to draw, some lady I knew saw my attempts 
and said, "You should go down to the Pasadena Art Museum. They have drawing classes 
there, with models — nude models." 

"No," I said; "I can't draw well enough: I’d feel very embarrassed." 

"You're good enough; you should see some of the others!" 

So I worked up enough courage to go down there. In the first lesson they told us 
about newsprint — very large sheets of low-grade paper, the size of a newspaper — and 
the various kinds of pencils and charcoal to get. For the second class a model came, and 
she started off with a ten-minute pose. 

I started to draw the model, and by the time I’d done one leg, the ten minutes were 
up. I looked around and saw that everyone else had already drawn a complete picture, 
with shading in the back — the whole business. 

I realized I was way out of my depth. But finally, at the end, the model was going 
to pose for thirty minutes. I worked very hard, and with great effort I was able to draw 
her whole outline. This time there was half a hope. So this time I didn't cover up my 
drawing, as I had done with all the previous ones. 

We went around to look at what the others had done, and I discovered what they 
could really do: they draw the model, with details and shadows, the pocketbook that's on 
the bench she’s sitting on, the platform, everything! They've all gone zip, zip, zip, zip, zip 
with the charcoal, all over, and I figure it's hopeless — utterly hopeless. 

I go back to cover up my drawing, which consists of a few lines crowded into the 
upper left-hand corner of the newsprint — I had, until then, only been drawing on 8 1/2 x 
11 paper — but some others in the class are standing nearby: "Oh, look at this one," one of 
them says. "Every line counts!" 

I didn’t know what that meant, exactly, but I felt encouraged enough to come to 
the next class. In the meantime, Jerry kept telling me that drawings that are too full 
aren't any good. His job was to teach me not to worry about the others, so he’d tell me 
they weren’t so hot. 

I noticed that the teacher didn’t tell people much (the only thing he told me was 
my picture was too small on the page). Instead, he tried to inspire us to experiment with 
new approaches. I thought of how we teach physics: We have so many techniques — so 
many mathematical methods — that we never stop telling the students how to do things. 

On the other hand, the drawing teacher is afraid to tell you anything. If your lines are 
very heavy, the teacher can't say, "Your lines are too heavy," because some artist has 
figured out a way of making great pictures using heavy lines. The teacher doesn’t want to 
push you in some particular direction. So the drawing teacher has this problem of 
communicating how to draw by osmosis and not by instruction, while the physics teacher 
has the problem of always teaching techniques, rather than the spirit, of how to go about 
solving physical problems. 

They were always telling me to "loosen up," to become more relaxed about 
drawing. I figured that made no more sense than telling someone who’s just learning to 
drive to "loosen up" at the wheel. It isn’t going to work. Only after you know how to do it 
carefully can you begin to loosen up. So I resisted this perennial loosen-up stuff. 

One exercise they had invented for loosening us up was to draw without looking 



at the paper. Don't take your eyes off the model; just look at her and make the lines on the 
paper without looking at what you're doing. 

One of the guys says, "I can't help it. I have to cheat. I bet everybody's cheating!" 

"I'm not cheating!" I say. 

"Aw, baloney!" they say. 

I finish the exercise and they come over to look at what I had drawn. They found 
that, indeed, I was NOT cheating; at the very beginning my pencil point had busted, and 
there was nothing but impressions on the paper. 

When I finally got my pencil to work, I tried it again. I found that my drawing had 
a kind of strength — a funny, semi-Picasso-like strength — which appealed to me. The 
reason I felt good about that drawing was, I knew it was impossible to draw well that 
way, and therefore it didn’t have to be good — and that's really what the loosening up was 
all about. I had thought that "loosen up" meant "make sloppy drawings," but it really 
meant to relax and not worry about how the drawing is going to come out. 

I made a lot of progress in the class, and I was feeling pretty good. Up until the 
last session, all the models we had were rather heavy and out of shape; they were rather 
interesting to draw. But in the last class we had a model who was a nifty blonde, perfectly 
proportioned. It was then that I discovered that I still didn’t know how to draw: I couldn’t 
make anything come out that looked anything like this beautiful girl! With the other 
models, if you draw something a little too big or bit too small, it doesn't make any 
difference because it's all out of shape anyway. But when you're trying to draw something 
that's so well put together, you can't fool yourself: It’s got to be just right! 

During one of the breaks I overheard a guy who could really draw asking this 
model whether she posed privately. She said yes. "Good. But I don’t have a studio yet. I'll 
have to work that out first." 

I figured I could learn a lot from this guy, and I’d never get another chance to 
draw this nifty model unless I did something. "Excuse me," I said to him, "I have a room 
downstairs in my house that could be used as a studio." 

They both agreed. I took a few of the guy's drawings to my friend Jerry, but he 
was aghast. "Those aren’t so good," he said. He tried to explain why, but I never really 
understood. 

Until I began to learn to draw, I was never much interested in looking at art. I had 
very little appreciation for things artistic, and only very rarely, such as once when I was 
in a museum in Japan. I saw a painting done on brown paper of bamboo, and what was 
beautiful about it to me was that it was perfectly poised between being just some brush 
strokes and being bamboo — I could make it go back and forth. 

The summer after the drawing class I was in Italy for a science conference and I 
thought I’d like to see the Sistine Chapel. I got there very early in the morning, bought my 
ticket before anybody else, and ran up the stairs as soon as the place opened. I therefore 
had the unusual pleasure of looking at the whole chapel for a moment, in silent awe, 
before anybody else came in. 

Soon the tourists came, and there were crowds of people milling around, talking 
different languages, pointing at this and that. I'm walking around, looking at the ceiling 
for a while. Then my eye came down a little bit and I saw some big, framed pictures, and 
I thought, "Gee! I never knew about these!" 

Unfortunately I’d left my guidebook at the hotel, but I thought to myself, "I know 



why these panels aren't famous; they aren’t any good." But then I looked at another one, 
and I said, "Wow! That's a good one." I looked at the others. "That's good too, so is that 
one, but that one’s lousy." I had never heard of these panels, but I decided that they were 
all good except for two. 

I went into a place called the Sala de Raphael — the Raphael Room — and I 
noticed the same phenomenon. I thought to myself, "Raphael is irregular. He doesn't 
always succeed. Sometimes he's very good. Sometimes it's just junk." 

When I got back to my hotel, I looked at the guidebook. In the part about the 
Sistine Chapel: "Below the paintings by Michelangelo there are fourteen panels by 
Botticelli, Perugino" — all these great artists — "and two by So-and-so, which are of no 
significance." This was a terrific excitement to me, that I also could tell the difference 
between a beautiful work of art and one that's not, without being able to define it. As a 
scientist you always think you know what you're doing, so you tend to distrust the artist 
who says, "It's great," or "It's no good," and then is not able to explain to you why, as 
Jerry did with those drawings I took him. But here I was, sunk: I could do it too! 

In the Raphael Room the secret turned out to be that only some of the paintings 
were made by the great master; the rest were made by students. I had liked the ones by 
Raphael. This was a big jab for my self-confidence in my ability to appreciate art. 

Anyway, the guy from the art class and the nifty model came over to my house a 
number of times and I tried to draw her and learn from him. After many attempts I finally 
drew what I felt was a really nice picture — it was a portrait of her head — and I got very 
excited about this first success. 

I had enough confidence to ask an old friend of mine named Steve Demitriades if 
his beautiful wife would pose for me, and in return I would give him the portrait. He 
laughed. "If she wants to waste her time posing for you, it's all right with me, ha, ha, ha." 

I worked very hard on her portrait, and when he saw it, he turned over to my side 
completely: "It's just wonderful!” he exclaimed. "Can you get a photographer to make 
copies of it? I want to send one to my mother in Greece!" His mother had never seen the 
girl he married. That was very exciting to me, to think that I had improved to the point 
where someone wanted one of my drawings. 

A similar thing happened at a small art exhibit that some guy at Caltech had 
arranged, where I contributed two drawings and a painting. He said, "We oughta put a 
price on the drawings." 

I thought, "That's silly! I'm not trying to sell them." 

"It makes the exhibition more interesting. If you don’t mind parting with them, 
just put a price on." 

After the show the guy told me that a girl had bought one of my drawings and 
wanted to speak to me to find out more about it. 

The drawing was called "The Magnetic Field of the Sun." For this particular 
drawing I had borrowed one of those beautiful pictures of the solar prominences taken at 
the solar laboratory in Colorado. Because I understood how the sun's magnetic field was 
holding up the flames and had, by that time, developed some technique for drawing 
magnetic field lines (it was similar to a girl's flowing hair), I wanted to draw something 
beautiful that no artist would think to draw: the rather complicated and twisting lines of 
the magnetic field, close together here and spreading out there. 

I explained all this to her, and showed her the picture that gave me the idea. 



She told me this story: She and her husband had gone to the exhibit, and they both 
liked the drawing very much. "Why don’t we buy it?" she suggested. 

Her husband was the kind of a man who could never do anything right away. 

"Let's think about it a while," he said. 

She realized his birthday was a few months ahead, so she went back the same day 
and bought it herself. 

That night when he came home from work, he was depressed. She finally got it 
out of him: He thought it would be nice to buy her that picture, but when he went back to 
the exhibit, he was told that the picture had already been sold. So she had it to surprise 
him on his birthday. 

What / got out of that story was something still very new to me: I understood at 
last what art is really for, at least in certain respects. It gives somebody, individually, 
pleasure. You can make something that somebody likes so much that they're depressed, 
or they're happy, on account of that damn thing you made! In science, it's sort of general 
and large: You don’t know the individuals who have appreciated it directly. 

I understood that to sell a drawing is not to make money, but to be sure that it's in 
the home of someone who really wants it; someone who would feel bad if they didn’t 
have it. This was interesting. 

So I decided to sell my drawings. However, I didn’t want people to buy my 
drawings because the professor of physics isn’t supposed to be able to draw, isn’t that 
wonderful, so I made up a false name. My friend Dudley Wright suggested "Au Fait," 
which means "It is done" in French. I spelled it O-f-e-y, which turned out to be a name 
the blacks used for "whitey." But after all, I was whitey, so it was all right. 

One of my models wanted me to make a drawing for her, but she didn’t have the 
money. (Models don’t have money; if they did, they wouldn’t be modeling.) She offered 
to pose three times free if I would give her a drawing. 

"On the contrary," I said. "I'll give you three drawings if you'll pose once for 
nothing." 

She put one of the drawings I gave her on the wall in her small room, and soon 
her boyfriend noticed it. He liked it so much that he wanted to commission a portrait of 
her. He would pay me sixty dollars. (The money was getting pretty good now.) 

Then she got the idea to be my agent: She could earn a little extra money by going 
around selling my drawings, saying, "There's a new artist in Altadena. . ." It was fun to be 
in a different world! She arranged to have some of my drawings put on display at 
Bullock's, Pasadena's most elegant department store. She and the lady from the art section 
picked out some drawings — drawings of plants that I had made early on (that I didn’t 
like) — and had them all framed. Then I got a signed document from Bullock's saying that 
they had such-and-such drawings on consignment. Of course nobody bought any of them, 
but otherwise I was a big success: I had my drawings on sale at Bullock's! It was fun to 
have them there, just so I could say one day that I had reached that pinnacle of success in 
the art world. 

Most of my models I got through Jerry, but I also tried to get models on my own. 
Whenever I met a young woman who looked as if she would be interesting to draw, I 
would ask her to pose for me. It always ended up that I would draw her face, because I 
didn't know exactly how to bring up the subject of posing nude. 

Once when I was over at Jerry's, I said to his wife Dabney, "I can never get the 



girls to pose nude: I don’t know how Jerry does it!" 

"Well, did you ever ask them?" 

"Oh! I never thought of that." 

The next girl I met that I wanted to pose for me was a Caltech student. I asked her 
if she would pose nude. "Certainly," she said, and there we were! So it was easy. I guess 
there was so much in the back of my mind that I thought it was somehow wrong to ask. 

I've done a lot of drawing by now, and I’ve gotten so I like to draw nudes best. For 
all I know it’s not art, exactly; it’s a mixture. Who knows the percentages? 

One model I met through Jerry had been a Playboy playmate. She was tall and 
gorgeous. However, she thought she was too tall. Every girl in the world, looking at her, 
would have been jealous. When she would come into a room, she’d be half stooped over. 

I tried to teach her, when she was posing, to please stand up, because she was so elegant 
and striking. I finally talked her into that. 

Then she had another worry: she’s got "dents" near her groin. I had to get out a 
book of anatomy to show her that it’s the attachment of the muscles to the ilium, and to 
explain to her that you can’t see these dents on everybody; to see them, everything must 
be just right, in perfect proportion, like she was. I learned from her that every woman is 
worried about her looks, no matter how beautiful she is. 

I wanted to draw a picture of this model in color, in pastels, just to experiment. I 
thought I would first make a sketch in charcoal, which would be later covered with the 
pastel. When I got through with this charcoal drawing that I had made without worrying 
how it was going to look, I realized that it was one of the best drawings I had ever made. 

I decided to leave it, and forget about the pastels for that one. My "agent" looked at it and 
wanted to take it around. "You can’t sell that," I said, "it’s on newsprint." 

"Oh, never mind," she said. 

A few weeks later she came back with this picture in a beautiful wooden frame 
with a red band and a gold edge. It’s a funny thing which must make artists, generally, 
unhappy — how much improved a drawing gets when you put a frame around it. My 
agent told me that a particular lady got all excited about the drawing and they took it to a 
picture framer. He told them that there were special techniques for mounting drawings on 
newsprint: Impregnate it with plastic, do this, do that. So this lady goes to all that trouble 
over this drawing I had made, and then has my agent bring it back to me. "I think the 
artist would like to see how lovely it is, framed," she said. 

I certainly did. There was another example of the direct pleasure somebody got 
out of one of my pictures. So it was a real kick selling the drawings. 

There was a period when there were topless restaurants in town: You could go 
there for lunch or dinner, and the girls would dance without a top, and after a while 
without anything. One of these places, it turned out, was only a mile and a half away 
from my house, so I went there very often. I’d sit in one of the booths and work a little 
physics on the paper placemats with the scalloped edges, and sometimes I’d draw one of 
the dancing girls or one of the customers, just to practice. 

My wife Gweneth, who is English, had a good attitude about my going to this 
place. She said, "The Englishmen have clubs they go to." So it was something like my 
club. 

There were pictures hanging around the place, but I didn’t like them much. They 



were these fluorescent colors on black velvet — kind of ugly — a girl taking off her 
sweater, or something. Well, I had a rather nice drawing I had made of my model Kathy, 
so I gave it to the owner of the restaurant to put up on the wall, and he was delighted. 

Giving him the drawing turned out to produce some useful results. The owner 
became very friendly to me, and would give me free drinks all the time. Now, every time 
I would come in to the restaurant a waitress would come over with my free 7-Up. I’d 
watch the girls dance, do a little physics, prepare a lecture, or draw a little bit. If I got a 
little tired, I’d watch the entertainment for a while, and then do a little more work. The 
owner knew I didn't want to be disturbed, so if a drunk man came over and started to talk 
to me, right away a waitress would come and get the guy out of there. If a girl came over, 
he would do nothing. We had a very good relationship. His name was Gianonni. 

The other effect of my drawing on display was that people would ask him about 
it. One day a guy came over to me and said, "Gianonni tells me you made that picture." 

"Yeah." 

"Good. I’d like to commission a drawing." 

"All right; what would you like?" 

"I want a picture of a nude toreador girl being charged by a bull with a man's 

head." 

"Well, uh, it would help me a little if I had some idea of what this drawing is for." 

"I want it for my business establishment." 

"What kind of business establishment?" 

"It's for a massage parlor: you know, private rooms, masseuses — get the idea?" 

"Yeah, I get the idea." I didn't want to draw a nude toreador girl being charged by 
a bull with a man's head, so I tried to talk him out of it. "How do you think that looks to 
the customers, and how does it make the girls feel? The men come in there and you get 
’em all excited with this picture. Is that the way you want 'em to treat the girls?" 

He's not convinced. 

"Suppose the cops come in and they see this picture, and you're claiming it's a 
massage parlor." 

"OK, OK," he says; "You’re right. I've gotta change it. What I want is a picture 
that, if the cops look at it, is perfectly OK for a massage parlor, but if a customer looks at 
it, it gives him ideas." 

"OK," I said. We arranged it for sixty dollars, and I began to work on the drawing. 
First, I had to figure out how to do it. I thought and I thought, and I often felt I would 
have been better off drawing the nude toreador girl in the first place! 

Finally I figured out how to do it: I would draw a slave girl in imaginary Rome, 
massaging some important Roman — a senator, perhaps. Since she's a slave girl, she has a 
certain look on her face. She knows what's going to happen next, and she's sort of 
resigned to it. 

I worked very hard on this picture. I used Kathy as the model. Later, I got another 
model for the man. I did lots of studies, and soon the cost for the models was already 
eighty dollars. I didn’t care about the money; I liked the challenge of having to do a 
commission. Finally I ended up with a picture of a muscular man lying on a table with the 
slave girl massaging him: she's wearing a kind of toga that covers one breast-the other 
one was nude-and I got the expression of resignation on her face just right. 

I was just about ready to deliver my commissioned masterpiece to the massage 



parlor when Gianonni told me that the guy had been arrested and was in jail. So I asked 
the girls at the topless restaurant if they knew any good massage parlors around Pasadena 
that would like to hang my drawing in the lobby. 

They gave me names and locations of places in and around Pasadena and told me 
things like "When you go to the Such-and-such massage parlor, ask for Frank — he's a 
pretty good guy. If he’s not there, don’t go in." Or "Don’t talk to Eddie. Eddie would never 
understand the value of a drawing." 

The next day I rolled up my picture, put it in the back of my station wagon, and 
my wife Gweneth wished me good luck as I set out to visit the brothels of Pasadena to 
sell my drawing. 

Just before I went to the first place on my list, I thought to myself, "You know, 
before I go anywhere else, I oughta check at the place he used to have. Maybe it's still 
open, and perhaps the new manager wants my drawing." I went over there and knocked 
on the door. It opened a little bit, and I saw a girl’s eye. "Do we know you?" she asked. 

"No, you don’t, but how would you like to have a drawing that would be 
appropriate for your entrance hall?" 

"I'm sorry," she said, "but we've already contracted an artist to make a drawing for 
us, and he's working on it." 

"I'm the artist," I said, "and your drawing is ready!" 

It turns out that the guy, as he was going to jail, told his wife about our 
arrangement. So I went in and showed them the drawing. 

The guy's wife and his sister, who were now running the place, were not entirely 
pleased with it; they wanted the girls to see it. I hung it up on the wall, there in the lobby, 
and all the girls came out from the various rooms in the back and started to make 
comments. 

One girl said she didn’t l ik e the expression on the slave girl’s face. "She doesn't 
look happy," she said. "She should be smiling." 

I said to her, "Tell me — while you're massaging a guy, and he’s not lookin' at you, 
are you smiling?" 

"Oh, no!" she said. "I feel exactly like she looks! But it's not right to put it in the 
picture." 

I left it with them, but after a week of worrying about it back and forth, they 
decided they didn’t want it. It turned out that the real reason that they didn’t want it was 
the one nude breast. I tried to explain that my drawing was a tone-down of the original 
request, but they said they had different ideas about it than the guy did. I thought the 
irony of people running such an establishment being prissy about one nude breast was 
amusing, and I took the drawing home. 

My businessman friend Dudley Wright saw the drawing and I told him the story 
about it. He said, "You oughta triple its price. With art, nobody is really sure of its value, 
so people often think, 'If the price is higher, it must be more valuable!"' 

I said, "You're crazy!" but, just for fun, I bought a twenty-dollar frame and 
mounted the drawing so it would be ready for the next customer. 

Some guy from the weather forecasting business saw the drawing I had given 
Gianonni and asked if I had others. I invited him and his wife to my "studio" downstairs 
in my home, and they asked about the newly framed drawing. "That one is two hundred 
dollars." (I had multiplied sixty by three and added twenty for the frame.) The next day 



they came back and bought it. So the massage parlor drawing ended up in the office of a 
weather forecaster. 

One day there was a police raid on Gianonni’s, and some of the dancers were 
arrested. Someone wanted to stop Gianonni from putting on topless dancing shows, and 
Gianonni didn’t want to stop. So there was a big court case about it; it was in all the local 
papers. 

Gianonni went around to all the customers and asked them if they would testily in 
support of him. Everybody had an excuse: "I run a day camp, and if the parents see that 
I'm going to this place, they won't send their kids to my camp. . ." Or, "I'm in the such- 
and-such business, and if it's publicized that I come down here, we'll lose customers." 

I think to myself, "I'm the only free man in here. I haven't any excuse! I like this 
place, and I’d like to see it continue, I don't see anything wrong with topless dancing." So 
I said to Gianonni, "Yes, I'll be glad to testily." 

In court the big question was, is topless dancing acceptable to the community — 
do community standards allow it? 

The lawyer from the defense tried to make me into an expert on community 
standards. He asked me if I went into other bars. 

"Yes." 

"And how many times per week would you typically go to Gianonni's?" 

"Five, six times a week." (That got into the papers: The Caltech professor of 
physics goes to see topless dancing six times a week.) 

"What sections of the community were represented at Gianonni’s?" 

"Nearly every section: there were guys from the real estate business, a guy from 
the city governing board, workmen from the gas station, guys from engineering firms, a 
professor of physics. . ." 

"So would you say that topless entertainment is acceptable to the community, 
given that so many sections of it are watching it and enjoying it?" 

"I need to know what you mean by 'acceptable to the community.' Nothing is 
accepted by everybody, so what percentage of the community must accept something in 
order for it to be 'acceptable to the community'?" 

The lawyer suggests a figure. The other lawyer objects. The judge calls a recess, 
and they all go into chambers for 15 minutes before they can decide that "acceptable to 
the community" means accepted by 50% of the community. 

In spite of the fact that I made them be precise, I had no precise numbers as 
evidence, so I said, "I believe that topless dancing is accepted by more than 50% of the 
community, and is therefore acceptable to the community." 

Gianonni temporarily lost the case, and his, or another one very similar to it, went 
ultimately to the Supreme Court. In the meantime, his place stayed open, and I got still 
more free 7-Ups. 

Around that time there were some attempts to develop an interest in art at Caltech. 
Somebody contributed the money to convert an old plant sciences building into some art 
studios. Equipment and supplies were bought and provided for the students, and they 
hired an artist from South Africa to coordinate and support the art activities around 
Caltech. 

Various people came in to teach classes. I got Jerry Zorthian to teach a drawing 
class, and some guy came in to teach lithography, which I tried to leam. 



The South African artist came over to my house one time to look at my drawings. 
He said he thought it would be fun to have a one-man show. This time I was cheating: If I 
hadn’t been a professor at Caltech, they would have never thought my pictures were 
worth it. 

"Some of my better drawings have been sold, and I feel uncomfortable calling the 
people," I said. 

"You don't have to worry, Mr. Feynman," he reassured me. "You won't have to 
call them up. We will make all the arrangements and operate the exhibit officially and 
correctly." 

I gave him a list of people who had bought my drawings, and they soon received a 
telephone call from him: "We understand that you have an Ofey." 

"Oh, yes!" 

"We are planning to have an exhibition of Ofeys, and we’re wondering if you 
would consider lending it to us." Of course they were delighted. 

The exhibition was held in the basement of the Athenaeum, the Caltech faculty 
club. Everything was like the real thing: All the pictures had titles, and those that had 
been taken on consignment from their owners had due recognition: "Lent by Mr. 
Gianonni," for instance. 

One drawing was a portrait of the beautiful blonde model from the art class, 
which I had originally intended to be a study of shading: I put a light at the level of her 
legs a bit to the side and pointed it upwards. As she sat, I tried to draw the shadows as 
they were — her nose cast its shadow rather unnaturally across her face — so they 
wouldn't look so bad. I drew her torso as well, so you could also see her breasts and the 
shadows they made. I stuck it in with the other drawings in the exhibit and called it 
"Madame Curie Observing the Radiations from Radium." The message I intended to 
convey was, nobody thinks of Madame Curie as a woman, as feminine, with beautiful 
hair, bare breasts, and all that. They only think of the radium part. 

A prominent industrial designer named Henry Dreyfuss invited various people to 
a reception at his home after the exhibition — the woman who had contributed money to 
support the arts, the president of Caltech and his wife, and so on. 

One of these art-lovers came over and started up a conversation with me: "Tell 
me, Professor Feynman, do you draw from photographs or from models?" 

"I always draw directly from a posed model." 

"Well, how did you get Madame Curie to pose for you?" 

Around that time the Los Angeles County Museum of Art had a similar idea to 
the one I had, that artists are far away from an understanding of science. My idea was that 
artists don’t understand the underlying generality and beauty of nature and her laws (and 
therefore cannot portray this in their art). The museum's idea was that artists should know 
more about technology: they should become more familiar with machines and other 
applications of science. 

The art museum organized a scheme in which they would get some of the really 
good artists of the day to go to various companies which volunteered some time and 
money to the project. The artists would visit these companies and snoop around until they 
saw something interesting that they could use in their work. The museum thought it 
might help if someone who knew something about technology could be a sort of liaison 



with the artists from time to time as they visited the companies. Since they knew I was 
fairly good at explaining things to people and I wasn’t a complete jackass when it came to 
art (actually, I think they knew I was trying to learn to draw) — at any rate, they asked me 
if I would do that, and I agreed. 

It was lots of fun visiting the companies with the artists. What typically happened 
was, some guy would show us a tube that discharged sparks in beautiful blue, twisting 
patterns. The artists would get all excited and ask me how they could use it in an exhibit. 
What were the necessary conditions to make it work? 

The artists were very interesting people. Some of them were absolute fakes: they 
would claim to be an artist, and everybody agreed they were an artist, but when you'd sit 
and talk to them, they'd make no sense whatsoever! One guy in particular, the biggest 
faker, always dressed funny; he had a big black bowler hat. He would answer your 
questions in an incomprehensible way, and when you'd try to find out more about what 
he said by asking him about some of the words he used, off we’d be in another direction! 
The only thing he contributed, ultimately, to the exhibit for art and technology was a 
portrait of himself. Other artists I talked to would say things that made no sense at first, 
but they would go to great lengths to explain their ideas to me. One time I went 
somewhere, as a part of this scheme, with Robert Irwin. It was a two-day trip, and after a 
great effort of discussing back and forth, I finally understood what he was trying to 
explain to me, and I thought it was quite interesting and wonderful. 

Then there were the artists who had absolutely no idea about the real world. They 
thought that scientists were some kind of grand magicians who could make anything, and 
would say things like, "I want to make a picture in three dimensions where the figure is 
suspended in space and it glows and flickers." They made up the world they wanted, and 
had no idea what was reasonable or unreasonable to make. 

Finally there was an exhibit, and I was asked to be on a panel which judged the 
works of art. Although there was some good stuff that was inspired by the artists' visiting 
the companies, I thought that most of the good works of art were things that were turned 
in at the last minute out of desperation, and didn’t really have anything to do with 
technology. All of the other members of the panel disagreed, and I found myself in some 
difficulty. I'm no good at criticizing art, and I shouldn’t have been on the panel in the first 
place. 

There was a guy there at the county art museum named Maurice Tuchman who 
really knew what he was talking about when it came to art. He knew that I had had this 
one-man show at Caltech. He said, "You know, you're never going to draw again." 

"What? That's ridiculous! Why should I never. . ." 

"Because you've had a one-man show, and you're only an amateur." 

Although I did draw after that, I never worked as hard, with the same energy and 
intensity, as I did before. I never sold a drawing after that, either. He was a smart fella, 
and I learned a lot from him. I could have learned a lot more, if I weren't so stubborn! 


Is Electricity Fire? 

In the early fifties I suffered temporarily from a disease of middle age: I used to 
give philosophical talks about science — how science satisfies curiosity, how it gives you 



a new world view, how it gives man the ability to do things, how it gives him power — 
and the question is, in view of the recent development of the atomic bomb, is it a good 
idea to give man that much power? I also thought about the relation of science and 
religion, and it was about this time when I was invited to a conference in New York that 
was going to discuss "the ethics of equality." 

There had already been a conference among the older people, somewhere on 
Long Island, and this year they decided to have some younger people come in and discuss 
the position papers they had worked out in the other conference. 

Before I got there, they sent around a list of "books you might find interesting to 
read, and please send us any books you want others to read, and we will store them in the 
library so that others may read them." 

So here comes this wonderful list of books. I start down the first page: I haven’t 
read a single one of the books, and I feel very uneasy — I hardly belong. I look at the 
second page: I haven’t read a single one. I found out, after looking through the whole list, 
that I haven’t read any of the books. I must be an idiot, an illiterate! There were 
wonderful books there, like Thomas Jefferson On Freedom , or something like that, and 
there were a few authors I had read. There was a book by Heisenberg, one by 
Schrodinger, and one by Einstein, but they were something like Einstein, My Later Fears 
and Schrodinger, What Is Life — different from what I had read. So I had a feeling that I 
was out of my depth, and that I shouldn't be in this. Maybe I could just sit quietly and 
listen. 

I go to the first big introductory meeting, and a guy gets up and explains that we 
have two problems to discuss. The first one is fogged up a little bit — something about 
ethics and equality, but I don’t understand what the problem exactly is. And the second 
one is, "We are going to demonstrate by our efforts a way that we can have a dialogue 
among people of different fields." There was an international lawyer, a historian, a Jesuit 
priest, a rabbi, a scientist (me), and so on. 

Well, right away my logical mind goes l ik e this: The second problem I don't have 
to pay any attention to, because if it works, it works; and if it doesn't work, it doesn't 
work — we don’t have to prove that we can have a dialogue, and discuss that we can have 
a dialogue, if we haven’t got any dialogue to talk about! So the primary problem is the 
first one, which I didn’t understand. 

I was ready to put my hand up and say, "Would you please define the problem 
better," but then I thought, "No, I’m the ignoramus; I’d better listen. I don't want to start 
trouble right away." 

The subgroup I was in was supposed to discuss the "ethics of equality in 
education." In the meetings of our subgroup the Jesuit priest was always talking about 
"the fragmentation of knowledge." He would say, "The real problem in the ethics of 
equality in education is the fragmentation of knowledge." This Jesuit was looking back 
into the thirteenth century when the Catholic Church was in charge of all education, and 
the whole world was simple. There was God, and everything came from God; it was all 
organized. But today, it's not so easy to understand everything. So knowledge has 
become fragmented. I felt that "the fragmentation of knowledge" had nothing to do with 
"it," but "it" had never been defined, so there was no way for me to prove that. 

Finally I said, "What is the ethical problem associated with the fragmentation of 
knowledge?" He would only answer me with great clouds of fog, and I’d say, "I don’t 



understand," and everybody else would say they did understand, and they tried to explain 
it to me, but they couldn’t explain it to me! 

So the others in the group told me to write down why I thought the fragmentation 
of knowledge was not a problem of ethics. I went back to my dormitory room and I wrote 
out carefully, as best I could, what I thought the subject of "the ethics of equality in 
education" might be, and I gave some examples of the kinds of problems I thought we 
might be talking about. For instance, in education, you increase differences. If someone's 
good at something, you try to develop his ability, which results in differences, or 
inequalities. So if education increases inequality, is this ethical? Then, after giving some 
more examples, I went on to say that while "the fragmentation of knowledge" is a 
difficulty because the complexity of the world makes it hard to learn things, in light of 
my definition of the realm of the subject, I couldn’t see how the fragmentation of 
knowledge had anything to do with anything approximating what the ethics of equality in 
education might more or less be. 

The next day I brought my paper into the meeting, and the guy said, "Yes, Mr. 
Feynman has brought up some very interesting questions we ought to discuss, and we'll 
put them aside for some possible future discussion." They completely missed the point. I 
was trying to define the problem, and then show how "the fragmentation of knowledge" 
didn't have anything to do with it. And the reason that nobody got anywhere in that 
conference was that they hadn’t clearly defined the subject of "the ethics of equality in 
education," and therefore no one knew exactly what they were supposed to talk about. 

There was a sociologist who had written a paper for us all to read — something he 
had written ahead of time. I started to read the damn thing, and my eyes were coming out: 
I couldn’t make head nor tail of it! I figured it was because I hadn’t read any of the books 
on that list. I had this uneasy feeling of "I'm not adequate," until finally I said to myself, 
"I'm gonna stop, and read one sentence slowly, so I can figure out what the hell it means." 

So I stopped — at random — and read the next sentence very carefully. I can't 
remember it precisely, but it was very close to this: "The individual member of the social 
community often receives his information via visual, symbolic channels." I went back 
and forth over it, and translated. You know what it means? "People read." 

Then I went over the next sentence, and I realized that I could translate that one 
also. Then it became a kind of empty business: "Sometimes people read; sometimes 
people listen to the radio," and so on, but written in such a fancy way that I couldn’t 
understand it at first, and when I finally deciphered it, there was nothing to it. 

There was only one thing that happened at that meeting that was pleasant or 
amusing. At this conference, every word that every guy said at the plenary session was so 
important that they had a stenotypist there, typing every goddamn thing. Somewhere on 
the second day the stenotypist came up to me and said, "What profession are you? Surely 
not a professor." 

"I am a professor," I said. 

"Of what?" 

"Of physics — science." 

"Oh! That must be the reason," he said. 

"Reason for what?" 

He said, "You see, I’m a stenotypist, and I type everything that is said here. Now, 
when the other fellas talk, I type what they say, but I don’t understand what they're 



saying. But every time you get up to ask a question or to say something, I understand 
exactly what you mean — what the question is, and what you're saying — so I thought you 
can't be a professor!" 

There was a special dinner at some point, and the head of the theology place, a 
very nice, very Jewish man, gave a speech. It was a good speech, and he was a very good 
speaker, so while it sounds crazy now, when I'm telling about it, at that time his main 
idea sounded completely obvious and true. He talked about the big differences in the 
welfare of various countries, which cause jealousy, which leads to conflict, and now that 
we have atomic weapons, any war and we’re doomed, so therefore the right way out is to 
strive for peace by making sure there are no great differences from place to place, and 
since we have so much in the United States, we should give up nearly everything to the 
other countries until we’re all even. Everybody was listening to this, and we were all full 
of sacrificial feeling, and all thinking we ought to do this. But I came back to my senses 
on the way home. 

The next day one of the guys in our group said, "I think that speech last night was 
so good that we should all endorse it, and it should be the summary of our conference." 

I started to say that the idea of distributing everything evenly is based on a theory 
that there's only X amount of stuff in the world, that somehow we took it away from the 
poorer countries in the first place, and therefore we should give it back to them. But this 
theory doesn’t take into account the real reason for the differences between countries — 
that is, the development of new techniques for growing food, the development of 
machinery to grow food and to do other things, and the fact that all this machinery 
requires the concentration of capital. It isn’t the stuff, but the power to make the stuff, that 
is important. But I realize now that these people were not in science; they didn’t 
understand it. They didn’t understand technology; they didn’t understand their time. 

The conference made me so nervous that a girl I knew in New York had to calm 
me down. "Look," she said, "you’re shaking! You've gone absolutely nuts! Just take it 
easy, and don’t take it so seriously. Back away a minute and look at what it is." So I 
thought about the conference, how crazy it was, and it wasn't so bad. But if someone 
were to ask me to participate in something like that again, I'd shy away from it like mad - 
-1 mean zero! No! Absolutely not! And I still get invitations for this kind of thing today. 

When it came time to evaluate the conference at the end, the others told how 
much they got out of it, how successful it was, and so on. When they asked me, I said, 
"This conference was worse than a Rorschach test: There's a meaningless inkblot, and the 
others ask you what you think you see, but when you tell them, they start arguing with 
you!" 

Even worse, at the end of the conference they were going to have another 
meeting, but this time the public would come, and the guy in charge of our group has the 
nerve to say that since we've worked out so much, there won’t be any time for public 
discussion, so we’ll just tell the public all the things we've worked out. My eyes bugged 
out: I didn’t think we had worked out a damn thing! 

Finally, when we were discussing the question of whether we had developed a 
way of having a dialogue among people of different disciplines — our second basic 
"problem" — I said that I noticed something interesting. Each of us talked about what we 
thought the "ethics of equality" was, from our own point of view, without paying any 
attention to the other guy's point of view. For example, the historian proposed that the 



way to understand ethical problems is to look historically at how they evolved and how 
they developed; the international lawyer suggested that the way to do it is to see how in 
fact people actually act in different situations and make their arrangements; the Jesuit 
priest was always referring to "the fragmentation of knowledge"; and I, as a scientist, 
proposed that we should isolate the problem in a way analogous to Galileo's techniques 
for experiments; and so on. "So, in my opinion," I said, "we had no dialogue at all. 
Instead, we had nothing but chaos!" 

Of course I was attacked, from all around. "Don’t you think that order can come 
from chaos?" 

"Uh, well, as a general principle, or. . ." I didn’t understand what to do with a 
question like "Can order come from chaos?" Yes, no, what of it? 

There were a lot of fools at that conference — pompous fools — and pompous 
fools drive me up the wall. Ordinary fools are all right; you can talk to them, and try to 
help them out. But pompous fools — guys who are fools and are covering it all over and 
impressing people as to how wonderful they are with all this hocus pocus — THAT, I 
CANNOT STAND! An ordinary fool isn’t a faker; an honest fool is all right. But a 
dishonest fool is terrible! And that’s what I got at the conference, a bunch of pompous 
fools, and I got very upset. I’m not going to get upset like that again, so I won’t participate 
in interdisciplinary conferences any more. 

A footnote: While I was at the conference, I stayed at the Jewish Theological 
Seminary, where young rabbis — I think they were Orthodox — were studying. Since I 
have a Jewish background, I knew of some of the things they told me about the Talmud, 
but I had never seen the Talmud. It was very interesting. It’s got big pages, and in a little 
square in the corner of the page is the original Talmud, and then in a sort of L-shaped 
margin, all around this square, are commentaries written by different people. The Talmud 
has evolved, and everything has been discussed again and again, all very carefully, in a 
medieval kind of reasoning. I think the commentaries were shut down around the 
thirteen- or fourteen- or fifteen-hundreds — there hasn't been any modem commentary. 
The Talmud is a wonderful book, a great, big potpourri of things: trivial questions, and 
difficult questions — for example, problems of teachers, and how to teach — and then 
some trivia again, and so on. The students told me that the Talmud was never translated, 
something I thought was curious, since the book is so valuable. 

One day, two or three of the young rabbis came to me and said, "We realize that 
we can't study to be rabbis in the modem world without knowing something about 
science, so we’d like to ask you some questions." 

Of course there are thousands of places to find out about science, and Columbia 
University was right near there, but I wanted to know what kinds of questions they were 
interested in. 

They said, "Well, for instance, is electricity fire?" 

"No," I said, "but. . . what is the problem?" 

They said, "In the Talmud it says you're not supposed to make fire on a Saturday, 
so our question is, can we use electrical things on Saturdays?" 

I was shocked. They weren't interested in science at all! The only way science 
was influencing their lives was so they might be able to interpret better the Talmud! They 
weren't interested in the world outside, in natural phenomena; they were only interested 
in resolving some question brought up in the Talmud. 



And then one day — I guess it was a Saturday — I want to go up in the elevator, 
and there's a guy standing near the elevator. The elevator comes, I go in, and he goes in 
with me. I say, "Which floor?" and my hand's ready to push one of the buttons. 

"No, no!" he says, " I'm supposed to push the buttons for you." 

"What?" 

"Yes! The boys here can't push the buttons on Saturday, so I have to do it for 
them. You see, I'm not Jewish, so it's all right for me to push the buttons. I stand near the 
elevator, and they tell me what floor, and I push the button for them." 

Well, this really bothered me, so I decided to trap the students in a logical 
discussion. I had been brought up in a Jewish home, so I knew the kind of nitpicking 
logic to use, and I thought, "Here's fun!" 

My plan went l ik e this: I’d start off by asking, "Is the Jewish viewpoint a 
viewpoint that any man can have? Because if it is not, then it's certainly not something 
that is truly valuable for humanity. . . yak, yak, yak." And then they would have to say, 
"Yes, the Jewish viewpoint is good for any man." 

Then I would steer them around a little more by asking, "Is it ethical for a man to 
hire another man to do something which is unethical for him to do? Would you hire a 
man to rob for you, for instance?" And I keep working them into the channel, very 
slowly, and very carefully, until I've got them — trapped! 

And do you know what happened? They're rabbinical students, right? They were 
ten times better than I was! As soon as they saw I could put them in a hole, they went 
twist, turn, twist — I can't remember how — and they were free! I thought I had come up 
with an original idea — phooey! It had been discussed in the Talmud for ages! So they 
cleaned me up just as easy as pie — they got right out. 

Finally I tried to assure the rabbinical students that the electric spark that was 
bothering them when they pushed the elevator buttons was not fire. I said, "Electricity is 
not fire. It's not a chemical process, as fire is." 

"Oh?" they said. 

"Of course, there's electricity in amongst the atoms in a fire." 

"Aha!" they said. 

"And in every other phenomenon that occurs in the world." 

I even proposed a practical solution for eliminating the spark. "If that's what's 
bothering you, you can put a condenser across the switch, so the electricity will go on and 
off without any spark whatsoever — anywhere." But for some reason, they didn’t l ik e that 
idea either. 

It really was a disappointment. Here they are, slowly coming to life, only to better 
interpret the Talmud. Imagine! In modern times like this, guys are studying to go into 
society and do something — to be a rabbi — and the only way they think that science 
might be interesting is because their ancient, provincial, medieval problems are being 
confounded slightly by some new phenomena. 

Something else happened at that time which is worth mentioning here. One of the 
questions the rabbinical students and I discussed at some length was why it is that in 
academic things, such as theoretical physics, there is a higher proportion of Jewish kids 
than their proportion in the general population. The rabbinical students thought the reason 
was that the Jews have a history of respecting learning: They respect their rabbis, who are 
really teachers, and they respect education. The Jews pass on this tradition in their 



families all the time, so that if a boy is a good student, it's as good as, if not better than, 
being a good football player. 

It was the same afternoon that I was reminded how true it is. I was invited to one 
of the rabbinical students' home, and he introduced me to his mother, who had just come 
back from Washington, D.C. She clapped her hands together, in ecstasy, and said, "Oh! 
My day is complete. Today I met a general, and a professor!" 

I realized that there are not many people who think it's just as important, and just 
as nice, to meet a professor as to meet a general. So I guess there's something in what 
they said. 


Judging Books by Their Covers 

After the war, physicists were often asked to go to Washington and give advice to 
various sections of the government, especially the military. What happened, I suppose, is 
that since the scientists had made these bombs that were so important, the military felt we 
were useful for something. 

Once I was asked to serve on a committee which was to evaluate various weapons 
for the anny, and I wrote a letter back which explained that I was only a theoretical 
physicist, and I didn't know anything about weapons for the anny. 

The army responded that they had found in their experience that theoretical 
physicists were very useful to them in making decisions, so would I please reconsider? 

I wrote back again and said I didn’t really know anything, and doubted I could 
help them. 

Finally I got a letter from the Secretary of the Army, which proposed a 
compromise: I would come to the first meeting, where I could listen and see whether I 
could make a contribution or not. Then I could decide whether I should continue. 

I said I would, of course. What else could I do? 

I went down to Washington and the first thing that I went to was a cocktail party 
to meet everybody. There were generals and other important characters from the army, 
and everybody talked. It was pleasant enough. 

One guy in a uniform came to me and told me that the anny was glad that 
physicists were advising the military because it had a lot of problems. One of the 
problems was that tanks use up their fuel very quickly and thus can't go very far. So the 
question was how to refuel them as they're going along. Now this guy had the idea that, 
since the physicists can get energy out of uranium, could I work out a way in which we 
could use silicon dioxide — sand, dirt — as a fuel? If that were possible, then all this tank 
would have to do would be to have a little scoop underneath, and as it goes along, it 
would pick up the dirt and use it for fuel! He thought that was a great idea, and that all I 
had to do was to work out the details. That was the kind of problem I thought we would 
be talking about in the meeting the next day. 

I went to the meeting and noticed that some guy who had introduced me to all the 
people at the cocktail party was sitting next to me. He was apparently some flunky 
assigned to be at my side at all times. On my other side was some super general I had 
heard of before. 

At the first session of the meeting they talked about some technical matters, and I 



made a few comments. But later on, near the end of the meeting, they began to discuss 
some problem of logistics, about which I knew nothing. It had to do with figuring out 
how much stuff you should have at different places at different times. And although I 
tried to keep my trap shut, when you get into a situation like that, where you're sitting 
around a table with all these "important people" discussing these "important problems," 
you can 7 keep your mouth shut, even if you know nothing whatsoever! So I made some 
comments in that discussion, too. 

During the next coffee break the guy who had been assigned to shepherd me 
around said, "I was very impressed by the things you said during the discussion. They 
certainly were an important contribution." 

I stopped and thought about my "contribution" to the logistics problem, and 
realized that a man like the guy who orders the stuff for Christmas at Macy's would be 
better able to figure out how to handle problems like that than I. So I concluded: a) if I 
had made an important contribution, it was sheer luck; b) anybody else could have done 
as well, but most people could have done better, and c) this flattery should wake me up to 
the fact that I am not capable of contributing much. 

Right after that they decided, in the meeting, that they could do better discussing 
the organization of scientific research (such as, should scientific development be under 
the Corps of Engineers or the Quartermaster Division?) than specific technical matters. I 
knew that if there was to be any hope of my making a real contribution, it would be only 
on some specific technical matter, and surely not on how to organize research in the 
army. 

Until then I didn’t let on any of my feelings about the situation to the chairman of 
the meeting — the big shot who had invited me in the first place. As we were packing our 
bags to leave, he said to me, all smiles, "You'll be joining us, then, for the next meeting. . 

"No, I won’t." I could see his face change suddenly. He was very surprised that I 
would say no, after making those "contributions." 

In the early sixties, a lot of my friends were still giving advice to the government. 
Meanwhile, I was having no feeling of social responsibility and resisting, as much as 
possible, offers to go to Washington, which took a certain amount of courage in those 
times. 


I was giving a series of freshman physics lectures at that time, and after one of 
them, Tom Harvey, who assisted me in putting on the demonstrations, said, "You oughta 
see what's happening to mathematics in schoolbooks! My daughter comes home with a 
lot of crazy stuff!" 

I didn’t pay much attention to what he said. 

But the next day I got a telephone call from a pretty famous lawyer here in 
Pasadena, Mr. Norris, who was at that time on the State Board of Education. He asked me 
if I would serve on the State Curriculum Commission, which had to choose the new 
schoolbooks for the state of California. You see, the state had a law that all of the 
schoolbooks used by all of the kids in all of the public schools have to be chosen by the 
State Board of Education, so they have a committee to look over the books and to give 
them advice on which books to take. 

It happened that a lot of the books were on a new method of teaching arithmetic 



that they called "new math," and since usually the only people to look at the books were 
schoolteachers or administrators in education, they thought it would be a good idea to 
have somebody who uses mathematics scientifically, who knows what the end product is 
and what we’re trying to teach it for, to help in the evaluation of the schoolbooks. 

I must have had, by this time, a guilty feeling about not cooperating with the 
government, because I agreed to get on this committee. 

Immediately I began getting letters and telephone calls from book publishers. 

They said things like, "We’re very glad to hear you're on the committee because we really 
wanted a scientific guy. . ." and "It's wonderful to have a scientist on the committee, 
because our books are scientifically oriented. . ." But they also said things like, "We’d 
like to explain to you what our book is about. . ." and "We’ll be very glad to help you in 
any way we can to judge our books. . ." That seemed to me kind of crazy. I'm an 
objective scientist, and it seemed to me that since the only thing the kids in school are 
going to get is the books (and the teachers get the teacher's manual, which I would also 
get), any extra explanation from the company was a distortion. So I didn’t want to speak 
to any of the publishers and always replied, "You don't have to explain; I'm sure the 
books will speak for themselves." 

I represented a certain district, which comprised most of the Los Angeles area 
except for the city of Los Angeles, which was represented by a very nice lady from the 
L.A. school system named Mrs. Whitehouse. Mr. Norris suggested that I meet her and 
find out what the committee did and how it worked. 

Mrs. Whitehouse started out telling me about the stuff they were going to talk 
about in the next meeting (they had already had one meeting; I was appointed late). 
"They're going to talk about the counting numbers." I didn’t know what that was, but it 
turned out they were what I used to call integers. They had different names for 
everything, so I had a lot of trouble right from the start. 

She told me how the members of the commission normally rated the new 
schoolbooks. They would get a relatively large number of copies of each book and would 
give them to various teachers and administrators in their district. Then they would get 
reports back on what these people thought about the books. Since I didn’t know a lot of 
teachers or administrators, and since I felt that I could, by reading the books myself, 
make up my mind as to how they looked to me, I chose to read all the books myself. 
(There were some people in my district who had expected to look at the books and 
wanted a chance to give their opinion. Mrs. Whitehouse offered to put their reports in 
with hers so they would feel better and I wouldn’t have to worry about their complaints. 
They were satisfied, and I didn’t get much trouble.) 

A few days later a guy from the book depository called me up and said, "We’re 
ready to send you the books, Mr. Feynman; there are three hundred pounds." 

I was overwhelmed. 

"It's all right, Mr. Feynman; we’ll get someone to help you read them." 

I couldn’t figure out how you do that: you either read them or you don’t read them. 
I had a special bookshelf put in my study downstairs (the books took up seventeen feet), 
and began reading all the books that were going to be discussed in the next meeting. We 
were going to start out with the elementary schoolbooks. 

It was a pretty big job, and I worked all the time at it down in the basement. My 
wife says that during this period it was like living over a volcano. It would be quiet for a 



while, but then all of a sudden, "BLLLLLOOOOOOWWWWW!!!!" — there would be a 
big explosion from the "volcano" below. The reason was that the books were so lousy. 
They were false. They were hurried. They would try to be rigorous, but they would use 
examples (like automobiles in the street for "sets") which were almost OK, but in which 
there were always some subtleties. The definitions weren't accurate. Everything was a 
little bit ambiguous — they weren't smart enough to understand what was meant by 
"rigor." They were faking it. They were teaching something they didn't understand, and 
which was, in fact, useless, at that time, for the child. 

I understood what they were trying to do. Many people thought we were behind 
the Russians after Sputnik, and some mathematicians were asked to give advice on how 
to teach math by using some of the rather interesting modem concepts of mathematics. 
The purpose was to enhance mathematics for the children who found it dull. 

I'll give you an example: They would talk about different bases of numbers — 
five, six, and so on — to show the possibilities. That would be interesting for a kid who 
could understand base ten — something to entertain his mind. But what they had turned it 
into, in these books, was that every child had to learn another base! And then the usual 
horror would come: "Translate these numbers, which are written in base seven, to base 
five." Translating from one base to another is an utterly useless thing. If you can do it, 
maybe it's entertaining; if you can't do it, forget it. There's no point to it. 

Anyhow, I'm looking at all these books, all these books, and none of them has 
said anything about using arithmetic in science. If there are any examples on the use of 
arithmetic at all (most of the time it's this abstract new modem nonsense), they are about 
things like buying stamps. 

Finally I come to a book that says, "Mathematics is used in science in many ways. 
We will give you an example from astronomy, which is the science of stars." I turn the 
page, and it says, "Red stars have a temperature of four thousand degrees, yellow stars 
have a temperature of five thousand degrees. . — so far, so good. It continues: "Green 

stars have a temperature of seven thousand degrees, blue stars have a temperature of ten 
thousand degrees, and violet stars have a temperature of. . . (some big number)." There 
are no green or violet stars, but the figures for the others are roughly correct. It's vaguely 
right — but already, trouble! That's the way everything was: Everything was written by 
somebody who didn’t know what the hell he was talking about, so it was a little bit 
wrong, always! And how we are going to teach well by using books written by people 
who don't quite understand what they're talking about, I cannot understand. I don’t know 
why, but the books are lousy; UNIVERSALLY LOUSY! 

Anyway, I'm happy with this book, because it's the first example of applying 
arithmetic to science. I’m a bit unhappy when I read about the stars' temperatures, but I’m 
not very unhappy because it's more or less right — it's just an example of error. Then 
comes the list of problems. It says, "John and his father go out to look at the stars. John 
sees two blue stars and a red star. His father sees a green star, a violet star, and two 
yellow stars. What is the total temperature of the stars seen by John and his father?" — 
and I would explode in horror. 

My wife would talk about the volcano downstairs. That’s only an example: it was 
perpetually like that. Perpetual absurdity! There's no purpose whatsoever in adding the 
temperature of two stars. Nobody ever does that except, maybe, to then take the average 
temperature of the stars, but not to find out the total temperature of all the stars! It was 



awful! All it was was a game to get you to add, and they didn’t understand what they 
were talking about. It was like reading sentences with a few typographical errors, and 
then suddenly a whole sentence is written backwards. The mathematics was like that. Just 
hopeless! 

Then I came to my first meeting. The other members had given some kind of 
ratings to some of the books, and they asked me what my ratings were. My rating was 
often different from theirs, and they would ask, "Why did you rate that book low?" 

I would say the trouble with that book was this and this on page so-and-so — I 
had my notes. 

They discovered that I was kind of a goldmine: I would tell them, in detail, 
what was good and bad in all the books; I had a reason for every rating. 

I would ask them why they had rated this book so high, and they would say, 
"Let us hear what you thought about such and such a book." I would never find out why 
they rated anything the way they did. Instead, they kept asking me what I thought. 

We came to a certain book, part of a set of three supplementary books published 
by the same company, and they asked me what I thought about it. 

I said, "The book depository didn’t send me that book, but the other two were 

nice." 

Someone tried repeating the question: "What do you think about that book?" 

"I said they didn’t send me that one, so I don't have any judgment on it." 

The man from the book depository was there, and he said, "Excuse me; I can 
explain that. I didn’t send it to you because that book hadn’t been completed yet. There's a 
rule that you have to have every entry in by a certain time, and the publisher was a few 
days late with it. So it was sent to us with just the covers, and it's blank in between. The 
company sent a note excusing themselves and hoping they could have their set of three 
books considered, even though the third one would be late." 

It turned out that the blank book had a rating by some of the other members! They 
couldn’t believe it was blank, because they had a rating. In fact, the rating for the missing 
book was a little bit higher than for the two others. The fact that there was nothing in the 
book had nothing to do with the rating. 

I believe the reason for all this is that the system works this way. When you give 
books all over the place to people, they're busy; they're careless; they think, "Well, a lot 
of people are reading this book, so it doesn't make any difference." And they put in some 
kind of number — some of them, at least; not all of them, but some of them. Then when 
you receive your reports, you don’t know why this particular book has fewer reports than 
the other books — that is, perhaps one book has ten, and this one only has six people 
reporting — so you average the rating of those who reported; you don’t average the ones 
who didn’t report, so you get a reasonable number. This process of averaging all the time 
misses the fact that there is absolutely nothing between the covers of the book! 

I made that theory up because I saw what happened in the curriculum 
commission: For the blank book, only six out of the ten members were reporting, whereas 
with the other books, eight or nine out of the ten were reporting. And when they averaged 
the six, they got as good an average as when they averaged with eight or nine. They were 
very embarrassed to discover they were giving ratings to that book, and it gave me a little 
bit more confidence. It turned out the other members of the committee had done a lot of 
work in giving out the books and collecting reports, and had gone to sessions in which 



the book publishers would explain the books before they read them; I was the only guy 
on that commission who read all the books and didn’t get any information from the book 
publishers except what was in the books themselves, the things that would ultimately go 
to the schools. 

This question of trying to figure out whether a book is good or bad by looking at 
it carefully or by taking the reports of a lot of people who looked at it carelessly is like 
this famous old problem: Nobody was permitted to see the Emperor of China, and the 
question was, What is the length of the Emperor of China’s nose? To find out, you go all 
over the country asking people what they think the length of the Emperor of China’s nose 
is, and you average it. And that would be very "accurate" because you averaged so many 
people. But it's no way to find anything out; when you have a very wide range of people 
who contribute without looking carefully at it, you don’t improve your knowledge of the 
situation by averaging. 

At first we weren’t supposed to talk about the cost of the books. We were told 
how many books we could choose, so we designed a program which used a lot of 
supplementary books, because all the new textbooks had failures of one kind or another. 
The most serious failures were in the "new math" books: there were no applications; not 
enough word problems. There was no talk of selling stamps; instead there was too much 
talk about commutation and abstract things and not enough translation to situations in the 
world. What do you do: add, subtract, multiply, or divide? So we suggested some books 
which had some of that as supplementary — one or two for each classroom — in addition 
to a textbook for each student. We had it all worked out to balance everything, after much 
discussion. 

When we took our recommendations to the Board of Education, they told us they 
didn't have as much money as they had thought, so we’d have to go over the whole thing 
and cut out this and that, now taking the cost into consideration, and ruining what was a 
fairly balanced program, in which there was a chance for a teacher to find examples of 
the things (s)he needed. 

Now that they changed the rules about how many books we could recommend 
and we had no more chance to balance, it was a pretty lousy program. When the senate 
budget committee got to it, the program was emasculated still further. Now it was really 
lousy! I was asked to appear before the state senators when the issue was being discussed, 
but I declined: By that time, having argued this stuff so much, I was tired. We had 
prepared our recommendations for the Board of Education, and I figured it was their job 
to present it to the state — which was legally right, but not politically sound. I shouldn’t 
have given up so soon, but to have worked so hard and discussed so much about all these 
books to make a fairly balanced program, and then to have the whole thing scrapped at 
the end — that was discouraging! The whole thing was an unnecessary effort that could 
have been turned around and done the opposite way: start with the cost of the books, and 
buy what you can afford. 

What finally clinched it, and made me ultimately resign, was that the following 
year we were going to discuss science books. I thought maybe the science would be 
different, so I looked at a few of them. 

The same thing happened: something would look good at first and then turn out to 
be horrifying. For example, there was a book that started out with four pictures: first there 
was a wind-up toy; then there was an automobile; then there was a boy riding a bicycle; 



then there was something else. And underneath each picture it said, "What makes it go?" 

I thought, "I know what it is: They're going to talk about mechanics, how the 
springs work inside the toy; about chemistry, how the engine of the automobile works; 
and biology, about how the muscles work." 

It was the kind of thing my father would have talked about: "What makes it go? 
Everything goes because the sun is shining." And then we would have fun discussing it: 

"No, the toy goes because the spring is wound up," I would say. 

"How did the spring get wound up?" he would ask. 

"I wound it up." 

"And how did you get moving?" 

"From eating." 

"And food grows only because the sun is shining. So it's because the sun is 
shining that all these things are moving." That would get the concept across that motion 
is simply the transformation of the sun's power. 

I turned the page. The answer was, for the wind-up toy, "Energy makes it go." 

And for the boy on the bicycle, "Energy makes it go." For everything, "Energy makes it 
go." 

Now that doesn’t mean anything. Suppose it's "Wakalixes." That's the general 
principle: "Wakalixes makes it go." There's no knowledge coming in. The child doesn’t 
learn anything; it's just a word! 

What they should have done is to look at the wind-up toy, see that there are 
springs inside, leam about springs, learn about wheels, and never mind "energy." Later 
on, when the children know something about how the toy actually works, they can 
discuss the more general principles of energy. 

It’s also not even true that "energy makes it go," because if it stops, you could say, 
"energy makes it stop" just as well. What they're talking about is concentrated energy 
being transformed into more dilute forms, which is a very subtle aspect of energy. Energy 
is neither increased nor decreased in these examples; it's just changed from one form to 
another. And when the things stop, the energy is changed into heat, into general chaos. 

But that's the way all the books were: They said things that were useless, mixed- 
up, ambiguous, confusing, and partially incorrect. How anybody can leam science from 
these books, I don’t know, because it's not science. 

So when I saw all these horrifying books with the same kind of trouble as the 
math books had, I saw my volcano process starting again. Since I was exhausted from 
reading all the math books, and discouraged from its all being a wasted effort, I couldn’t 
face another year of that, and had to resign. Sometime later I heard that the energy- 
makes-it-go book was going to be recommended by the curriculum commission to the 
Board of Education, so I made one last effort. At each meeting of the commission the 
public was allowed to make comments, so I got up and said why I thought the book was 
bad. 

The man who replaced me on the commission said, "That book was approved by 
sixty-five engineers at the Such-and-such Aircraft Company!" 

I didn’t doubt that the company had some pretty good engineers, but to take sixty- 
five engineers is to take a wide range of ability — and to necessarily include some pretty 
poor guys! It was once again the problem of averaging the length of the emperor's nose, 
or the ratings on a book with nothing between the covers. It would have been far better to 



have the company decide who their better engineers were, and to have them look at the 
book. I couldn’t claim that I was smarter than sixty-five other guys — but the average of 
sixty-five other guys, certainly! 

I couldn’t get through to him, and the book was approved by the board. 

When I was still on the commission, I had to go to San Francisco a few times for 
some of the meetings, and when I returned to Los Angeles from the first trip, I stopped in 
the commission office to get reimbursed for my expenses. 

"How much did it cost, Mr. Feynman?" 

"Well, I flew to San Francisco, so it's the airfare, plus the parking at the airport 
while I was away." 

"Do you have your ticket?" 

I happened to have the ticket. 

"Do you have a receipt for the parking?" 

"No, but it cost $2.35 to park my car." 

"But we have to have a receipt." 

"I told you how much it cost. If you don’t trust me, why do you let me tell you 
what I think is good and bad about the schoolbooks?". 

There was a big stew about that. Unfortunately, I had been used to giving lectures 
for some company or university or for ordinary people, not for the government. I was 
used to, "What were your expenses?" — "So-and-so much." — "Here you are, Mr. 
Feynman." 

I then decided I wasn’t going to give them a receipt for anything. 

After the second trip to San Francisco they again asked me for my ticket and 
receipts. 

"I haven't got any." 

"This can't go on, Mr. Feynman." 

"When I accepted to serve on the commission, I was told you were going to pay 
my expenses." 

"But we expected to have some receipts to prove the expenses." 

"I have nothing to prove it, but you know I live in Los Angeles and I go to these 
other towns; how the hell do you think I get there?" 

They didn’t give in, and neither did 1.1 feel when you're in a position like that, 
where you choose not to buckle down to the System, you must pay the consequences if it 
doesn't work. So I'm perfectly satisfied, but I never did get compensation for the trips. 

It's one of those games I play. They want a receipt? I'm not giving them a receipt. 
Then you're not going to get the money. OK, then I’m not taking the money. They don’t 
trust me? The hell with it; they don’t have to pay me. Of course it's absurd! I know that's 
the way the government works; well, screw the government! I feel that human beings 
should treat human beings like human beings. And unless I'm going to be treated like 
one, I'm not going to have anything to do with them! They feel bad? They feel bad. I feel 
bad, too. We’ll just let it go. I know they're "protecting the taxpayer," but see how well 
you think the taxpayer was being protected in the following situation. 

There were two books that we were unable to come to a decision about after much 
discussion; they were extremely close. So we left it open to the Board of Education to 
decide. Since the board was now taking the cost into consideration, and since the two 
books were so evenly matched, the board decided to open the bids and take the lower 



one. 


Then the question came up, "Will the schools be getting the books at the regular 
time, or could they, perhaps, get them a little earlier, in time for the coming term?" 

One publisher's representative got up and said, "We are happy that you accepted 
our bid; we can get it out in time for the next term." 

A representative of the publisher that lost out was also there, and he got up and 
said, "Since our bids were submitted based on the later deadline, I think we should have a 
chance to bid again for the earlier deadline, because we too can meet the earlier 
deadline." 

Mr. Norris, the Pasadena lawyer on the board, asked the guy from the other 
publisher, "And how much would it cost for us to get your books at the earlier date?" 

And he gave a number: It was less! 

The first guy got up: "If he changes his bid, I have the right to change my bid!" — 
and his bid is still less! 

Norris asked, "Well how is that — we get the books earlier and it's cheaper?” 

"Yes," one guy says. "We can use a special offset method we wouldn’t normally 
use. . ." — some excuse why it came out cheaper. 

The other guy agreed: "When you do it quicker, it costs less!" 

That was really a shock. It ended up two million dollars cheaper. Norris was 
really incensed by this sudden change. 

What happened, of course, was that the uncertainty about the date had opened the 
possibility that these guys could bid against each other. Normally, when books were 
supposed to be chosen without taking the cost into consideration, there was no reason to 
lower the price; the book publishers could put the prices at any place they wanted to. 
There was no advantage in competing by lowering the price; the way you competed was 
to impress the members of the curriculum commission. 

By the way, whenever our commission had a meeting, there were book publishers 
entertaining curriculum commission members by taking them to lunch and talking to 
them about their books. I never went. 

It seems obvious now, but I didn’t know what was happening the time I got a 
package of dried fruit and whatnot delivered by Western Union with a message that read, 
"From our family to yours, Happy Thanksgiving — The Families." 

It was from a family I had never heard of in Long Beach, obviously someone 
wanting to send this to his friend’s family who got the name and address wrong, so I 
thought I’d better straighten it out. I called up Western Union, got the telephone number 
of the people who sent the stuff, and I called them. 

"Hello, my name is Mr. Feynman. I received a package. . ." 

"Oh, hello, Mr. Feynman, this is Pete Pamilio" and he says it in such a friendly 
way that I think I'm supposed to know who he is! I'm normally such a dunce that I can’t 
remember who anyone is. 

So I said, "I'm sorry, Mr. Pamilio, but I don’t quite remember who you are. . ." 

It turned out he was a representative of one of the publishers whose books I had to 
judge on the curriculum commission. 

"I see. But this could be misunderstood." 

"It's only family to family." 

"Yes, but I'm judging a book that you're publishing, and maybe someone might 



misinterpret your kindness!" I knew what was happening, but I made it sound like I was a 
complete idiot. 

Another thing like this happened when one of the publishers sent me a leather 
briefcase with my name nicely written in gold on it. I gave them the same stuff: "I can't 
accept it; I'm judging some of the books you’re publishing. I don't think you understand 
that!" 

One commissioner, who had been there for the greatest length of time, said, "I 
never accept the stuff; it makes me very upset. But it just goes on." 

But I really missed one opportunity. If I had only thought fast enough, I could 
have had a veiy good time on that commission. I got to the hotel in San Francisco in the 
evening to attend my very first meeting the next day, and I decided to go out to wander in 
the town and eat something. I came out of the elevator, and sitting on a bench in the hotel 
lobby were two guys who jumped up and said, "Good evening, Mr. Feynman. Where are 
you going? Is there something we can show you in San Francisco?" They were from a 
publishing company, and I didn’t want to have anything to do with them. 

"I'm going out to eat." 

"We can take you out to dinner." 

"No, I want to be alone." 

"Well, whatever you want, we can help you." 

I couldn’t resist. I said, "Well, I’m going out to get myself in trouble." 

"I think we can help you in that, too." 

"No, I think I'll take care of that myself." Then I thought, "What an error! I should 
have let all that stuff operate and keep a diary, so the people of the state of California 
could find out how far the publishers will go!" And when I found out about the two- 
million-do liar difference, God knows what the pressures are! 

