Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

________

Contents

Part One: The Lesson 1 

1 The Lesson 3 

Part Two: The Lesson Applied 9 

2 The Broken Window 11 

3 The Blessings of Destruction 13 

4 Public Works Mean Taxes 17 

5 Taxes Discourage Production 23 

6 Credit Diverts Production 25 

7 The Curse of Machinery 33 

8 Spread-the-Work Schemes 45 

9 Disbanding Troops and Bureaucrats 51 

10 The Fetish of Full Employment 55 

11 Who’s “Protected” by Tariffs? 59 

12 The Drive for Exports 69 

13 “Parity” Prices 75 

14 Saving the X Industry 83 

15 How the Price System Works 89 

16 “Stabilizing” Commodities 97 

17 Government Price-Fixing 105 

18 Minimum Wage Laws 115 

19 Do Unions Really Raise Wages? 121 

20 “Enough to Buy Back the Product” 133 

21 The Function of Profits 141 

22 The Mirage of Inflation 145 

23 The Assault on Saving 159 

Part Three: The Lesson Restated 173 

24 The Lesson Restated 175 

________

Part One: The Lesson 

Chapter 1 

The Lesson 


1 

Economics is haunted by more fallacies than any other study known 
to man. This is no accident. The inherent difficulties of the sub- 
ject would be great enough in any case, but they are multiplied a thou- 
sandfold by a factor that is insignificant in, say, physics, mathematics, 
or medicine — the special pleading of selfish interests. While every 
group has certain economic interests identical with those of all groups, 
every group has also, as we shall see, interests antagonistic to those of 
all other groups. While certain public policies would in the long run 
benefit everybody, other policies would benefit one group only at the 
expense of all other groups. The group that would benefit by such 
policies, having such a direct interest in them, will argue for them plau- 
sibly and persistendy. It will hire the best buyable minds to devote their 
whole time to presenting its case. And it will finally either convince the 
general public that its case is sound, or so befuddle it that clear think- 
ing on the subject becomes next to impossible. 

In addition to these endless pleadings of self-interest, there is a sec- 
ond main factor that spawns new economic fallacies every day. This is 
the persistent tendency of men to see only the immediate effects of a 
given policy, or its effects only on a special group, and to neglect to 
inquire what the long-run effects of that policy will be not only on that 


3 



4 Economics in One Lesson 


special group but on all groups. It is the fallacy of overlooking second- 
ary consequences. 

In this lies almost the whole difference between good economics 
and bad. The bad economist sees only what immediately strikes the 
eye; the good economist also looks beyond. The bad economist sees 
only the direct consequences of a proposed course; the good econo- 
mist looks also at the longer and indirect consequences. The bad 
economist sees only what the effect of a given policy has been or will 
be on one particular group; the good economist inquires also what the 
effect of the policy will be on all groups. 

The distinction may seem obvious. The precaution of looking for 
all the consequences of a given policy to everyone may seem elemen- 
tary. Doesn’t everybody know, in his personal life, that there are all 
sorts of indulgences delightful at the moment but disastrous in the 
end? Doesn’t every little boy know that if he eats enough candy he 
will get sick? Doesn’t the fellow who gets drunk know that he will 
wake up next morning with a ghastly stomach and a horrible head? 
Doesn’t the dipsomaniac know that he is ruining his liver and short- 
ening his life? Doesn’t the Don juan know that he is letting himself 
in for every sort of risk, from blackmail to disease? Finally, to bring 
it to the economic though still personal realm, do not the idler and 
the spendthrift know, even in the midst of their glorious fling, that 
they are heading for a future of debt and poverty? 

Yet when we enter the field of public economics, these elementary 
truths are ignored. There are men regarded today as brilliant econo- 
mists, who deprecate saving and recommend squandering on a 
national scale as the way of economic salvation; and when anyone 
points to what the consequences of these policies will be in the long 
run, they reply flippantly, as might the prodigal son of a warning 
father: “In the long run we are all dead.” And such shallow wisecracks 
pass as devastating epigrams and the ripest wisdom. 

But the tragedy is that, on the contrary, we are already suffering the 
long-run consequences of the policies of the remote or recent past. 
Today is already the tomorrow which the bad economist yesterday 
urged us to ignore. The long-run consequences of some economic 
policies may become evident in a few months. Others may not 
become evident for several years. Still others may not become evident 
for decades. But in every case those long-run consequences are con- 
tained in the policy as surely as the hen was in the egg, the flower in 
the seed. 

From this aspect, therefore, the whole of economics can be 
reduced to a single lesson, and that lesson can be reduced to a single 
sentence. The art of economics consists in looking not ?>terely at the immediate hut 
at the longer effects of any act or polity; it consists in tracing the consequences of that 
polity not merely for one group but for all groups. 

2 

Nine-tenths of the economic fallacies that are working such dread- 
ful harm in the world today are the result of ignoring this lesson. 
Those fallacies all stem from one of two central fallacies, or both: that 
of looking only at the immediate consequences of an act or proposal, 
and that of looking at the consequences only for a particular group to 
the neglect of other groups. 

It is true, of course, that the opposite error is possible. In consid- 
ering a policy we ought not to concentrate only on its long-run results 
to the community as a whole. This is the error often made by the clas- 
sical economists. It resulted in a certain callousness toward the fate of 
groups that were immediately hurt by policies or developments which 
proved to be beneficial on net balance and in the long run. 

But comparatively few people today make this error; and those few 
consist mainly of professional economists. The most frequent fallacy 
by far today, the fallacy that emerges again and again in nearly every 
conversation that touches on economic affairs, the error of a thou- 
sand political speeches, the central sophism of the “new” economics, 
is to concentrate on the short-run effects of policies on special groups 
and to ignore or belitde the long-run effects on the community as a 
whole. The “new” economists flatter themselves that this is a great, 
almost a revolutionary advance over the methods of the “classical” or 
“orthodox” economists, because the former take into consideration 
short-run effects which the latter often ignored. But in themselves 



6 Economics in One Lesson 


ignoring or slighting the long-run effects, they are making the far 
more serious error. They overlook the woods in their precise and 
minute examination of particular trees. Their methods and conclu- 
sions are often profoundly reactionary. They are sometimes surprised 
to find themselves in accord with seventeenth-century mercantilism. 
They fall, in fact, into all the ancient errors (or would, if they were not 
so inconsistent) that the classical economists, we had hoped, had once 
for all got rid of. 


3 

It is often sadly remarked that the bad economists present their 
errors to the public better than the good economists present their 
truths. It is often complained that demagogues can be more plausi- 
ble in putting forward economic nonsense from the platform than the 
honest men who try to show what is wrong with it. But the basic rea- 
son for this ought not to be mysterious. The reason is that the dema- 
gogues and bad economists are presenting half-truths. They are speak- 
ing only of the immediate effect of a proposed policy or its effect 
upon a single group. As far as they go they may often be right. In these 
cases the answer consists in showing that the proposed policy would 
also have longer and less desirable effects, or that it could benefit one 
group only at the expense of all other groups. The answer consists in 
supplementing and correcting the half-truth with the other half. But to 
consider all the chief effects of a proposed course on everybody often 
requires a long, complicated, and dull chain of reasoning. Most of the 
audience finds this chain of reasoning difficult to follow and soon 
becomes bored and inattentive. The bad economists rationalize this 
intellectual debility and laziness by assuring the audience that it need 
not even attempt to follow the reasoning or judge it on its merits 
because it is only “classicism” or “laissez-faire,” or “capitalist apologet- 
ics” or whatever other term of abuse may happen to strike them as 
effective. 

We have stated the nature of the lesson, and of the fallacies that 
stand in its way, in abstract terms. But the lesson will not be driven 
home, and the fallacies will continue to go unrecognized, unless both 
are illustrated by examples. Through these examples we can move 
from the most elementary problems in economics to the most com- 
plex and difficult. Through them we can learn to detect and avoid first 
the crudest and most palpable fallacies and finally some of the most 
sophisticated and elusive. To that task we shall now proceed. 

