Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Part Two: The Lesson Applied 

Chapter 2 

The Broken Window 

Let us begin with the simplest illustration possible: let us, emulat- 
ing Bastiat, choose a broken pane of glass. 

A young hoodlum, say, heaves a brick through the window of a 
baker’s shop. The shopkeeper runs out furious, but the boy is gone. A 
crowd gathers, and begins to stare with quiet satisfaction at the gaping 
hole in the window and the shattered glass over the bread and pies. 
After a while the crowd feels the need for philosophic reflection. And 
several of its members are almost certain to remind each other or the 
baker that, after all, the misfortune has its bright side. It will make 
business for some glazier. As they begin to think of this they elabo- 
rate upon it. How much does a new plate glass window cost? Fifty dol- 
lars? That will be quite a sum. After all, if windows were never bro- 
ken, what would happen to the glass business? Then, of course, the 
thing is endless. The glazier will have $50 more to spend with other 
merchants, and these in turn will have $50 more to spend with still 
other merchants, and so ad infinitum. The smashed window will go on 
providing money and employment in ever-widening circles. The logi- 
cal conclusion from all this would be, if the crowd drew it, that the lit- 
tle hoodlum who threw the brick, far from being a public menace, was 
a public benefactor. 


11 



12 Economics in One Lesson 


Now let us take another look. The crowd is at least right in its first 
conclusion. This little act of vandalism will in the first instance mean 
more business for some gla 2 ier. The gla 2 ier will be no more unhappy 
to learn of the incident than an undertaker to learn of a death. But 
the shopkeeper will be out $50 that he was planning to spend for a 
new suit. Because he has had to replace a window, he will have to go 
without the suit (or some equivalent need or luxury). Instead of hav- 
ing a window and $50 he now has merely a window. Or, as he was 
planning to buy the suit that very afternoon, instead of having both a 
window and a suit he must be content with the window and no suit. 
If we think of him as a part of the community, the community has 
lost a new suit that might otherwise have come into being, and is just 
that much poorer. 

The gla 2 ier’s gain of business, in short, is merely the tailor’s loss of 
business. No new “employment” has been added. The people in the 
crowd were thinking only of two parties to the transaction, the baker 
and the gla 2 ier. They had forgotten the potential third party involved, 
the tailor. They forgot him precisely because he will not now enter the 
scene. They will see the new window in the next day or two. They will 
never see the extra suit, precisely because it will never be made. They 
see only what is immediately visible to the eye. 

