Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Chapter 3 

The Blessings of Destruction 


So we have finished with the broken window An elementary fallacy. 

Anybody, one would think, would be able to avoid it after a few 
moments’ thought. Yet the broken-window fallacy, under a hundred 
disguises, is the most persistent in the history of economics. It is more 
rampant now than at any time in the past. It is solemnly reaffirmed 
every day by great captains of industry, by chambers of commerce, by 
labor union leaders, by editorial writers and newspaper columnists and 
radio commentators, by learned statisticians using the most refined 
techniques, by professors of economics in our best universities. In 
their various ways they all dilate upon the advantages of destruction. 

Though some of them would disdain to say that there are net ben- 
efits in small acts of destruction, they see almost endless benefits in 
enormous acts of destruction. They tell us how much better off eco- 
nomically we all are in war than in peace. They see “miracles of produc- 
tion” which it requires a war to achieve. And they see a postwar world 
made certainly prosperous by an enormous “accumulated” or “backed- 
up” demand. In Europe they joyously count the houses, the whole cities 
that have been leveled to the ground and that “will have to be replaced.” 
In America they count the houses that could not be built during the war, 
the nylon stockings that could not be supplied, the worn-out automo- 
biles and tires, the obsolescent radios and refrigerators. They bring 
together formidable totals. 


13 



14 Economics in One Lesson 


It is merely our old friend, the broken-window fallacy, in new 
clothing, and grown fat beyond recognition. This time it is supported 
by a whole bundle of related fallacies. It confuses need with demand. 
The more war destroys, the more it impoverishes, the greater is the 
postwar need. Indubitably. But need is not demand. Effective eco- 
nomic demand requires not merely need but corresponding purchas- 
ing power. The needs of China today are incomparably greater than 
the needs of America. But its purchasing power, and therefore the 
“new business” that it can stimulate, are incomparably smaller. 

But if we get past this point, there is a chance for another fallacy, 
and the broken-windowites usually grab it. They think of “purchasing 
power” merely in terms of money. Now money can be run off by the 
printing press. As this is being written, in fact, printing money is the 
world’s biggest industry — if the product is measured in monetary 
terms. But the more money is turned out in this way, the more the 
value of any given unit of money falls. This falling value can be meas- 
ured in rising prices of commodities. But as most people are so firmly 
in the habit of thinking of their wealth and income in terms of money, 
they consider themselves better off as these monetary totals rise, in 
spite of the fact that in terms of things they may have less and buy less. 
Most of the “good” economic results which people attribute to war are 
really owing to wartime inflation. They could be produced just as well 
by an equivalent peacetime inflation. We shall come back to this money 
illusion later. 

Now there is a half-truth in the “backed-up” demand fallacy, just 
as there was in the broken-window fallacy. The broken window did 
make more business for the gla 2 ier. The destruction of war will make 
more business for the producers of certain things. The destruction of 
houses and cities will make more business for the building and con- 
struction industries. The inability to produce automobiles, radios, and 
refrigerators during the war will bring about a cumulative postwar 
demand for those particular products. 

To most people this will seem like an increase in total demand, as 
it may well be in terms of dollars of lower purchasingpower. But what really takes 
place is a diversion of demand to these particular products from others. 
The people of Europe will build more new houses than otherwise 
because they must. But when they build more houses they will have 
just that much less manpower and productive capacity left over for 
everything else. When they buy houses they will have just that much 
less purchasing power for everything else. Wherever business is 
increased in one direction, it must (except insofar as productive ener- 
gies may be generally stimulated by a sense of want and urgency) be 
correspondingly reduced in another. 

The war, in short, will change the postwar direction of effort; it will 
change the balance of industries; it will change the structure of indus- 
try. And this in time will also have its consequences. There will be 
another distribution of demand when accumulated needs for houses 
and other durable goods have been made up. Then these temporarily 
favored industries will, relatively, have to shrink again, to allow other 
industries filling other needs to grow. 

It is important to keep in mind, finally, that there will not merely 
be a difference in the pattern of postwar as compared with pre-war 
demand. Demand will not merely be diverted from one commodity to 
another. In most countries it will shrink in total amount. 

This is inevitable when we consider that demand and supply are 
merely two sides of the same coin. They are the same thing looked at 
from different directions. Supply creates demand because at bottom it 
is demand. The supply of the thing they make is all that people have, 
in fact, to offer in exchange for the things they want. In this sense the 
farmers’ supply of wheat constitutes their demand for automobiles 
and other goods. The supply of motor cars constitutes the demand of 
the people in the automobile industry for wheat and other goods. All 
this is inherent in the modern division of labor and in an exchange 
economy. 

This fundamental fact, it is true, is obscured for most people 
(including some reputedly brilliant economists) through such compli- 
cations as wage payments and the indirect form in which virtually all 
modern exchanges are made through the medium of money. John 
Stuart Mill and other classical writers, though they sometimes failed to 
take sufficient account of the complex consequences resulting from 
the use of money, at least saw through the monetary veil to the under- 
lying realities. To that extent they were in advance of many of their 



1 6 Economics in One Lesson 


present-day critics, who are befuddled by money rather than 
instructed by it. Mere inflation — that is, the mere issuance of more 
money, with the consequence of higher wages and prices — may look 
like the creation of more demand. But in terms of the actual produc- 
tion and exchange of real things it is not. Yet a fall in postwar demand 
may be concealed from many people by the illusions caused by higher 
money wages that are more than offset by higher prices. 

Postwar demand in most countries, to repeat, will shrink in absolute 
amount as compared with pre-war demand because postwar supply 
will have shrunk. This should be obvious enough in Germany and 
Japan, where scores of great cities were leveled to the ground. The 
point, in short, is plain enough when we make the case extreme 
enough. If England, instead of being hurt only to the extent she was 
by her participation in the war, had had all her great cities destroyed, all 
her factories destroyed and almost all her accumulated capital and con- 
sumer goods destroyed, so that her people had been reduced to the 
economic level of the Chinese, few people would be talking about the 
great accumulated and backed-up demand caused by the war. It would 
be obvious that buying power had been wiped out to the same extent 
that productive power had been wiped out. A runaway monetary infla- 
tion, lifting prices a thousandfold, might nonetheless make the 
“national income” figures in monetary terms higher than before the 
war. But those who would be deceived by that into imagining them- 
selves richer than before the war would be beyond the reach of rational 
argument. Yet the same principles apply to a small war destruction as 
to an overwhelming one. 

There may be, it is true, offsetting factors. Technological discover- 
ies and advances during the war, for example, may increase individual 
or national productivity at this point or that. The destruction of war 
will, it is true, divert postwar demand from some channels into others. 
And a certain number of people may continue to be deceived indefi- 
nitely regarding their real economic welfare by rising wages and prices 
caused by an excess of printed money. But the belief that a genuine 
prosperity can be brought about by a “replacement demand” for 
things destroyed or not made during the war is nonetheless a palpable 
fallacy. 
