Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Chapter 4 

Public Works Mean Taxes 


1 

There is no more persistent and influential faith in the world today 
than the faith in government spending. Everywhere government 
spending is presented as a panacea for all our economic ills. Is private 
industry partially stagnant? We can fix it all by government spending. 
Is there unemployment? That is obviously due to “insufficient private 
purchasing power.” The remedy is just as obvious. All that is neces- 
sary is for the government to spend enough to make up the “defi- 
ciency.” 

An enormous literature is based on this fallacy, and, as so often 
happens with doctrines of this sort, it has become part of an intricate 
network of fallacies that mutually support each other. We cannot 
explore that whole network at this point; we shall return to other 
branches of it later. But we can examine here the mother fallacy that 
has given birth to this progeny, the main stem of the network. 

Everything we get, outside of the free gifts of nature, must in some 
way be paid for. The world is full of so-called economists who in turn 
are full of schemes for getting something for nothing. They tell us that 
the government can spend and spend without taxing at all; that it can 
continue to pile up debt without ever paying it off, because “we owe it 
to ourselves.” We shall return to such extraordinary doctrines at a later 


17 



1 8 Economics in One Lesson 


point. Here I am afraid that we shall have to be dogmatic, and point out 
that such pleasant dreams in the past have always been shattered by 
national insolvency or a runaway inflation. Here we shall have to say 
simply that all government expenditures must eventually be paid out of 
the proceeds of taxation; that to put off the evil day merely increases 
the problem, and that inflation itself is merely a form, and a particularly 
vicious form, of taxation. 

Having put aside for later consideration the network of fallacies 
which rest on chronic government borrowing and inflation, we shall 
take it for granted throughout the present chapter that either immedi- 
ately or ultimately every dollar of government spending must be 
raised through a dollar of taxation. Once we look at the matter in this 
way, the supposed miracles of government spending will appear in 
another light. 

A certain amount of public spending is necessary to perform 
essential government functions. A certain amount of public works — 
of streets and roads and bridges and tunnels, of armories and navy 
yards, of buildings to house legislatures, police, and fire depart- 
ments — is necessary to supply essential public services. With such 
public works, necessary for their own sake, and defended on that 
ground alone, I am not here concerned. I am here concerned with 
public works considered as a means of “providing employment” or of 
adding wealth to the community that it would not otherwise have had. 

A bridge is built. If it is built to meet an insistent public demand, if 
it solves a traffic problem or a transportation problem otherwise insol- 
uble, if, in short, it is even more necessary than the things for which the 
taxpayers would have spent their money if it had not been taxed away 
from them, there can be no objection. But a bridge built primarily “to 
provide employment” is a different kind of bridge. When providing 
employment becomes the end, need becomes a subordinate considera- 
tion. “Projects” have to be invented. Instead of thinking only where 
bridges must be built, the government spenders begin to ask themselves 
where bridges can be built. Can they think of plausible reasons why an 
additional bridge should connect Easton and Weston? It soon becomes 
absolutely essential. Those who doubt the necessity are dismissed as 
obstructionists and reactionaries. 

Two arguments are put forward for the bridge, one of which is 
mainly heard before it is built, the other of which is mainly heard after 
it has been completed. The first argument is that it will provide 
employment. It will provide, say, 500 jobs for a year. The implication 
is that these are jobs that would not otherwise have come into exis- 
tence. 

This is what is immediately seen. But if we have trained ourselves 
to look beyond immediate to secondary consequences, and beyond 
those who are directiy benefited by a government project to others 
who are indirectiy affected, a different picture presents itself. It is true 
that a particular group of bridgeworkers may receive more employ- 
ment than otherwise. But the bridge has to be paid for out of taxes. 
For every dollar that is spent on the bridge a dollar will be taken away 
from taxpayers. If the bridge costs $1,000,000 the taxpayers will lose 
$1,000,000. They will have that much taken away from them which 
they would otherwise have spent on the things they needed most. 

Therefore for every public job created by the bridge project a pri- 
vate job has been destroyed somewhere else. We can see the men 
employed on the bridge. We can watch them at work. The employ- 
ment argument of the government spenders becomes vivid, and 
probably for most people convincing. But there are other things that 
we do not see, because, alas, they have never been permitted to come 
into existence. They are the jobs destroyed by the $1,000,000 taken 
from the taxpayers. All that has happened, at best, is that there has 
been a diversion of jobs because of the project. More bridge builders; 
fewer automobile workers, radio technicians, clothing workers, farm- 
ers. 

But then we come to the second argument. The bridge exists. It is, 
let us suppose, a beautiful and not an ugly bridge. It has come into being 
through the magic of government spending. Where would it have been 
if the obstructionists and the reactionaries had had their way? There 
would have been no bridge. The country would have been just that 
much poorer. 



20 Economics in One Lesson 


Here again the government spenders have the better of the argu- 
ment with all those who cannot see beyond the immediate range of 
their physical eyes. They can see the bridge. But if they have taught 
themselves to look for indirect as well as direct consequences they can 
once more see in the eye of imagination the possibilities that have 
never been allowed to come into existence. They can see the unbuilt 
homes, the unmade cars and radios, the unmade dresses and coats, per- 
haps the unsold and ungrown foodstuffs. To see these uncreated things 
requires a kind of imagination that not many people have. We can 
think of these nonexistent objects once, perhaps, but we cannot keep 
them before our minds as we can the bridge that we pass every work- 
ing day. What has happened is merely that one thing has been created 
instead of others. 


2 

The same reasoning applies, of course, to every other form of 
public work. It applies just as well, for example, to the erection with 
public funds of housing for people of low incomes. All that happens 
is that money is taken away through taxes from families of higher 
income (and perhaps a litde from families of even lower income) to 
force them to subsidke these selected families with low incomes and 
enable them to live in better housing for the same rent or for lower 
rent than previously. 

I do not intend to enter here into all the pros and cons of public 
housing. I am concerned only to point out the error in two of the argu- 
ments most frequendy put forward in favor of public housing. One is 
the argument that it “creates employment;” the other that it creates 
wealth which would not otherwise have been produced. Both of these 
arguments are false, because they overlook what is lost through taxa- 
tion. Taxation for public housing destroys as many jobs in other lines as 
it creates in housing. It also results in unbuilt private homes, in unmade 
washing machines and refrigerators, and in lack of innumerable other 
commodities and services. 

And none of this is answered by the sort of reply which points 
out, for example, that public housing does not have to be financed by 
a lump sum capital appropriation, but merely by annual rent subsidies. 
This simply means that the cost is spread over many years instead of 
being concentrated in one. It also means that what is taken from the 
taxpayers is spread over many years instead of being concentrated 
into one. Such technicalities are irrelevant to the main point. 

The great psychological advantage of the public housing advocates 
is that men are seen at work on the houses when they are going up, and 
the houses are seen when they are finished. People live in them, and 
proudly show their friends through the rooms. The jobs destroyed by 
the taxes for the housing are not seen, nor are the goods and services 
that were never made. It takes a concentrated effort of thought, and a 
new effort each time the houses and the happy people in them are seen, 
to think of the wealth that was not created instead. Is it surprising that 
the champions of public housing should dismiss this, if it is brought to 
their attention, as a world of imagination, as the objections of pure the- 
ory, while they point to the public housing that exists? As a character in 
Bernard Shaw’s Saint Joan replies when told of the theory of Pythagoras 
that the earth is round and revolves around the sun: “What an utter 
fool! Couldn’t he use his eyes?” 

We must apply the same reasoning, once more, to great projects 
like the Tennessee Valley Authority. Here, because of sheer size, the 
danger of optical illusion is greater than ever. Here is a mighty dam, 
a stupendous arc of steel and concrete, “greater than anything that 
private capital could have built,” the fetish of photographers, the 
heaven of socialists, the most often used symbol of the miracles of 
public construction, ownership, and operation. Here are mighty gen- 
erators and power houses. Here is a whole region lifted to a higher 
economic level, attracting factories and industries that could not oth- 
erwise have existed. And it is all presented, in the panegyrics of its 
partisans, as a net economic gain without offsets. 

We need not go here into the merits of the TVA or public projects 
like it. But this time we need a special effort of the imagination, which 
few people seem able to make, to look at the debit side of the ledger. 
If taxes are taken from people and corporations, and spent in one par- 
ticular section of the country, why should it cause surprise, why 



22 Economics in One Lesson 


should it be regarded as a miracle, if that section becomes compara- 
tively richer? Other secdons of the country, we should remember, are 
then comparatively poorer. The thing so great that “private capital 
could not have built it” has in fact been built by private capital — the 
capital that was expropriated in taxes (or, if the money was borrowed, 
that eventually must be expropriated in taxes). Again we must make an 
effort of the imagination to see the private power plants, the private 
homes, the typewriters and radios that were never allowed to come 
into existence because of the money that was taken from people all 
over the country to build the photogenic Norris Dam. 

3 

I have deliberately chosen the most favorable examples of public 
spending schemes — that is, those that are most frequently and fer- 
vently urged by the government spenders and most highly regarded by 
the public. I have not spoken of the hundreds of boondoggling proj- 
ects that are invariably embarked upon the moment the main object is 
to “give jobs” and “to put people to work.” For then the usefulness of 
the project itself, as we have seen, inevitably becomes a subordinate 
consideration. Moreover, the more wasteful the work, the more costly 
in manpower, the better it becomes for the purpose of providing 
more employment. Under such circumstances it is highly improbable 
that the projects thought up by the bureaucrats will provide the same 
net addition to wealth and welfare, per dollar expended, as would have 
been provided by the taxpayers themselves, if they had been individ- 
ually permitted to buy or have made what they themselves wanted, 
instead of being forced to surrender part of their earnings to the state. 

