Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Chapter 6 

Credit Diverts Production 


1 

Government “encouragement” to business is sometimes as much 
to be feared as government hostility. This supposed encourage- 
ment often takes the form of a direct grant of government credit or 
a guarantee of private loans. 

The question of government credit can often be complicated, 
because it involves the possibility of inflation. We shall defer analysis 
of the effects of inflation of various kinds until a later chapter. Here, 
for the sake of simplicity, we shall assume that the credit we are dis- 
cussing is noninflationary. Inflation, as we shall later see, while it com- 
plicates the analysis, does not at bottom change the consequences of 
the policies discussed. 

The most frequent proposal of this sort in Congress is for more 
credit to farmers. In the eyes of most Congressmen the farmers sim- 
ply cannot get enough credit. The credit supplied by private mortgage 
companies, insurance companies or country banks is never “ade- 
quate.” Congress is always finding new gaps that are not filled by the 
existing lending institutions, no matter how many of these it has itself 
already brought into existence. The farmers may have enough long- 
term credit or enough short-term credit, but, it turns out, they have 
not enough “intermediate” credit; or the interest rate is too high; or 


25 



26 Economics in One Lesson 


the complaint is that private loans are made only to rich and well- 
established farmers. So new lending institutions and new types of 
farm loans are piled on top of each other by the legislature. 

The faith in all these policies, it will be found, springs from two 
acts of shortsightedness. One is to look at the matter only from the 
standpoint of the farmers that borrow. The other is to think only of 
the first half of the transaction. 

Now all loans, in the eyes of honest borrowers, must eventually be 
repaid. All credit is debt. Proposals for an increased volume of credit, 
therefore, are merely another name for proposals for an increased 
burden of debt. They would seem considerably less inviting if they 
were habitually referred to by the second name instead of by the first. 

We need not discuss here the normal loans that are made to farm- 
ers through private sources. They consist of mortgages; of installment 
credits for the purchase of automobiles, refrigerators, radios, tractors, 
and other farm machinery, and of bank loans made to carry the 
farmer along until he is able to harvest and market his crop and get 
paid for it. Here we need concern ourselves only with loans to farmers 
either made directly by some government bureau or guaranteed by it. 

These loans are of two main types. One is a loan to enable the 
farmer to hold his crop off the market. This is an especially harmful 
type; but it will be more convenient to consider it later when we come 
to the question of government commodity controls. The other is a 
loan to provide capital — often to set the farmer up in business by 
enabling him to buy the farm itself, or a mule or tractor, or all three. 

At first glance the case for this type of loan may seem a strong one. 
Here is a poor family, it will be said, with no means of livelihood. It is 
cruel and wasteful to put them on relief. Buy a farm for them; set them 
up in business; make productive and self-respecting citizens of them; let 
them add to the total national product and pay the loan off out of what 
they produce. Or here is a farmer struggling along with primitive meth- 
ods of production because he has not the capital to buy himself a trac- 
tor. Lend him the money for one; let him increase his productivity; he 
can repay the loan out of the proceeds of his increased crops. In that 
way you not only enrich him and put him on his feet; you enrich the 
whole community by that much added output. And the loan, concludes 
the argument, costs the government and the taxpayers less than noth- 
ing, because it is “self-liquidating.” 

Now as a matter of fact this is what happens every day under the 
institution of private credit. If a man wishes to buy a farm, and has, 
let us say, only half or a third as much money as the farm costs, a 
neighbor or a savings bank will lend him the rest in the form of a 
mortgage on the farm. If he wishes to buy a tractor, the tractor com- 
pany itself, or a finance company, will allow him to buy it for one-third 
of the purchase price with the rest to be paid off in installments out 
of earnings that the tractor itself will help to provide. 

But there is a decisive difference between the loans supplied by pri- 
vate lenders and the loans supplied by a government agency. Each pri- 
vate lender risks his own funds. (A banker, it is true, risks the funds of 
others that have been entrusted to him; but if money is lost he must 
either make good out of his own funds or be forced out of business.) 
When people risk their own funds they are usually careful in their 
investigations to determine the adequacy of the assets pledged and 
the business acumen and honesty of the borrower. 

If the government operated by the same strict standards, there 
would be no good argument for its entering the field at all. Why do 
precisely what private agencies already do? But the government 
almost invariably operates by different standards. The whole argument 
for its entering the lending business, in fact, is that it will make loans 
to people who could not get them from private lenders. This is only 
another way of saying that the government lenders will take risks with 
other people’s money (the taxpayers’) that private lenders will not take 
with their own money. Sometimes, in fact, apologists will freely 
acknowledge that the percentage of losses will be higher on these 
government loans than on private loans. But they contend that this 
will be more than offset by the added production brought into exis- 
tence by the borrowers who pay back, and even by most of the bor- 
rowers who do not pay back. 

This argument will seem plausible only as long as we concentrate 
our attention on the particular borrowers whom the government 



28 Economics in One Lesson 


supplies with funds, and overlook the people whom its plan deprives 
of funds. For what is really being lent is not money, which is merely 
the medium of exchange, but capital. (I have already put the reader on 
notice that we shall postpone to a later point the complications intro- 
duced by an inflationary expansion of credit.) What is really being 
lent, say, is the farm or the tractor itself. Now the number of farms in 
existence is limited, and so is the production of tractors (assuming, 
especially, that an economic surplus of tractors is not produced sim- 
ply at the expense of other things). The farm or tractor that is lent to 
A cannot be lent to B. The real question is, therefore, whether A or B 
shall get the farm. 

This brings us to the respective merits of A and B, and what each 
contributes, or is capable of contributing, to production. A, let us say, 
is the man who would get the farm if the government did not inter- 
vene. The local banker or his neighbors know him and know his 
record. They want to find employment for their funds. They know 
that he is a good farmer and an honest man who keeps his word. They 
consider him a good risk. He has already, perhaps, through industry, 
frugality and foresight, accumulated enough cash to pay one-fourth of 
the price of the farm. They lend him the other three-fourths; and he 
gets the farm. 

There is a strange idea abroad, held by all monetary cranks, that 
credit is something a banker gives to a man. Credit, on the contrary, is 
something a man already has. He has it, perhaps, because he already has 
marketable assets of a greater cash value than the loan for which he is 
asking. Or he has it because his character and past record have earned 
it. He brings it into the bank with him. That is why the banker makes 
him the loan. The banker is not giving something for nothing. He feels 
assured of repayment. He is merely exchanging a more liquid form of 
asset or credit for a less liquid form. Sometimes he makes a mistake, and 
then it is not only the banker who suffers, but the whole community; 
for values which were supposed to be produced by the lender are not 
produced and resources are wasted. 

Now it is to A, let us say, who has credit, that the banker would 
make his loan. But the government goes into the lending business in 



Credit Diverts Vroduction 29 


a charitable frame of mind because, as we saw, it is worried about B. 
B cannot get a mortgage or other loans from private lenders because 
he does not have credit with them. He has no savings; he has no 
impressive record as a good farmer; he is perhaps at the moment on 
relief. Why not, say the advocates of government credit, make him a 
useful and productive member of society by lending him enough for 
a farm and a mule or tractor and setting him up in business? 

Perhaps in an individual case it may work out all right. But it is obvi- 
ous that in general the people selected by these government standards 
will be poorer risks than the people selected by private standards. More 
money will be lost by loans to them. There will be a much higher per- 
centage of failures among them. They will be less efficient. More 
resources will be wasted by them. Yet the recipients of government 
credit will get their farms and tractors at the expense of what other- 
wise would have been the recipients of private credit. Because B has a 
farm, A will be deprived of a farm. A may be squeezed out either 
because interest rates have gone up as a result of the government oper- 
ations, or because farm prices have been forced up as a result of them, 
or because there is no other farm to be had in his neighborhood. In 
any case the net result of government credit has not been to increase 
the amount of wealth produced by the community but to reduce it, 
because the available real capital (consisting of actual farms, tractors, 
etc.) has been placed in the hands of the less efficient borrowers rather 
than in the hands of the more efficient and trustworthy. 

2 

The case becomes even clearer if we turn from farming to other 
forms of business. The proposal is frequently made that the govern- 
ment ought to assume the risks that are “too great for private indus- 
try.” This means that bureaucrats should be permitted to take risks 
with the taxpayers’ money that no one is willing to take with his own. 

Such a policy would lead to evils of many different kinds. It would 
lead to favoritism: to the making of loans to friends, or in return for 
bribes. It would inevitably lead to scandals. It would lead to recrimina- 
tions whenever the taxpayers’ money was thrown away on enterprises 



30 Economics in One Lesson 


that failed. It would increase the demand for socialism: for, it would 
properly be asked, if the government is going to bear the risks, why 
should it not also get the profits? What justification could there pos- 
sibly be, in fact, for asking the taxpayers to take the risks while per- 
mitting private capitalists to keep the profits? (This is precisely, how- 
ever, as we shall later see, what we already do in the case of 
“nonrecourse” government loans to farmers.) 

But we shall pass over all these evils for the moment, and concen- 
trate on just one consequence of loans of this type. This is that they 
will waste capital and reduce production. They will throw the available 
capital into bad or at best dubious projects. They will throw it into the 
hands of persons who are less competent or less trustworthy than 
those who would otherwise have got it. For the amount of real capi- 
tal at any moment (as distinguished from monetary tokens run off on 
a printing press) is limited. What is put into the hands of B cannot be 
put into the hands of A. 

People want to invest their own capital. But they are cautious. They 
want to get it back. Most lenders, therefore, investigate any proposal 
carefully before they risk their own money in it. They weigh the 
prospect of profits against the chances of loss. They may sometimes 
make mistakes. But for several reasons they are likely to make fewer 
mistakes than government lenders. In the first place, the money is 
either their own or has been voluntarily entrusted to them. In the case 
of government lending the money is that of other people, and it has 
been taken from them, regardless of their personal wish, in taxes. The 
private money will be invested only where repayment with interest or 
profit is definitely expected. This is a sign that the persons to whom 
the money has been lent will be expected to produce things for the 
market that people actually want. The government money, on the 
other hand, is likely to be lent for some vague general purpose like 
“creating employment;” and the more inefficient the work — that is, 
the greater the volume of employment it requires in relation to the 
value of product — the more highly thought of the investment is likely 
to be. 



Credit Diverts Vroduction 31 


The private lenders, moreover, are selected by a cruel market test. 
If they make bad mistakes they lose their money and have no more 
money to lend. It is only if they have been successful in the past that 
they have more money to lend in the future. Thus private lenders 
(except the relatively small proportion that have got their funds 
through inheritance) are rigidly selected by a process of survival of 
the fittest. The government lenders, on the other hand, are either 
those who have passed civil service examinations, and know how to 
answer hypothetical questions hypothetically, or they are those who 
can give the most plausible reasons for making loans and the most 
plausible explanations of why it wasn’t their fault that the loans failed. 
But the net result remains: private loans will utilize existing resources 
and capital far better than government loans. Government loans will 
waste far more capital and resources than private loans. Government 
loans, in short, as compared with private loans, will reduce produc- 
tion, not increase it. 

The proposal for government loans to private individuals or proj- 
ects, in brief, sees B and forgets A. It sees the people in whose hands 
the capital is put; it forgets those who would otherwise have had it. It 
sees the project to which capital is granted; it forgets the projects from 
which capital is thereby withheld. It sees the immediate benefit to one 
group; it overlooks the losses to other groups, and the net loss to the 
community as a whole. 

It is one more illustration of the fallacy of seeing only a special 
interest in the short run and forgetting the general interest in the long 
run. 


3 

We remarked at the beginning of this chapter that government “aid” 
to business is sometimes as much to be feared as government hostility. 
This applies as much to government subsidies as to government loans. 
The government never lends or gives anything to business that it does 
not take away from business. One often hears New Dealers and other 
statists boast about the way government “baled business out” with 
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Home Owners Loan 



32 "Economics in One Lesson 


Corporation, and other government agencies in 1932 and later. But the 
government can give no financial help to business that it does not first 
or finally take from business. The government’s funds all come from 
taxes. Even the much vaunted “government credit” rests on the 
assumption that its loans will ultimately be repaid out of the proceeds 
of taxes. When the government makes loans or subsidies to business, 
what it does is to tax successful private business in order to support 
unsuccessful private business. Under certain emergency circumstances 
there may be a plausible argument for this, the merits of which we need 
not examine here. But in the long run it does not sound like a paying 
proposition from the standpoint of the country as a whole. And expe- 
rience has shown that it isn’t. 
