Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Chapter 7 

The Curse of Machinery 

1 

Among the most viable of all economic delusions is the belief that 
machines on net balance create unemployment. Destroyed a 
thousand times, it has risen a thousand times out of its own ashes as 
hardy and vigorous as ever. Whenever there is long-continued mass 
unemployment, machines get the blame anew. This fallacy is still the 
basis of many labor union practices. The public tolerates these prac- 
tices because it either believes at bottom that the unions are right, or 
is too confused to see just why they are wrong. 

The belief that machines cause unemployment, when held with 
any logical consistency, leads to preposterous conclusions. Not only 
must we be causing unemployment with every technological improve- 
ment we make today, but primitive man must have started causing it 
with the first efforts he made to save himself from needless toil and 
sweat. 

To go no further back, let us turn to Adam Smith’s The Wealth of 
Nations, published in 1776. The first chapter of this remarkable book is 
called “Of the Division of Labor,” and on the second page of this first 
chapter the author tells us that a workman unacquainted with the use of 
machinery employed in pin making “could scarce make one pin a day, 
and certainly could not make twenty,” but that with the use of this 


33 



34 Economics in One Lesson 


machinery he can make 4,800 pins a day. So already, alas, in Adam 
Smith’s time, machinery had thrown from 240 to 4,800 pin makers out 
of work for every one it kept. In the pin-making industry there was 
already, if machines merely throw men out of jobs, 99.98 percent unem- 
ployment. Could things be blacker? 

Things could be blacker, for the Industrial Revolution was just in 
its infancy. Let us look at some of the incidents and aspects of that 
revolution. Let us see, for example, what happened in the stocking 
industry. New stocking frames as they were introduced were destroyed 
by the handicraft workmen (over 1,000 in a single riot), houses were 
burned, the inventors were threatened and obliged to fly for their 
lives, and order was not finally restored until the military had been 
called out and the leading rioters had been either transported or 
hanged. 

Now it is important to bear in mind that insofar as the rioters were 
thinking of their own immediate or even longer futures their opposi- 
tion to the machine was rational. For William Felkin, in his History of the 
Machine-Wrought Hosiery Manufactures (1867), tells us that the larger part of 
the 50,000 English stocking knitters and their families did not fully 
emerge from the hunger and misery entailed by the introduction of the 
machine for the next forty years. But in so far as the rioters believed, 
as most of them undoubtedly did, that the machine was permanently 
displacing men, they were mistaken, for before the end of the nine- 
teenth century the stocking industry was employing at least 100 men 
for every man it employed at the beginning of the century. 

Arkwright invented his cotton- spinning machinery in 1760. At 
that time it was estimated that there were in England 5,200 spinners 
using spinning wheels, and 2,700 weavers — in all, 7,900 persons 
engaged in the production of cotton textiles. The introduction of 
Arkwright’s invention was opposed on the ground that it threatened 
the livelihood of the workers, and the opposition had to be put down 
by force. Yet in 1787 — twenty-seven years after the invention 
appeared — a parliamentary inquiry showed that the number of per- 
sons actually engaged in the spinning and weaving of cotton had 
risen from 7,900 to 320,000, an increase of 4,400 percent. 
If the reader will consult such a book as Recent Economic Changes, by 
David A. Wells, published in 1889, he will find passages that, except for 
the dates and absolute amounts involved, might have been written by 
our technophobes (if I may coin a needed word) of today. Let me 
quote a few: 

During the ten years from 1870 to 1880, inclusive, the 
British mercantile marine increased its movement, in the 
matter of foreign entries and clearances alone, to the 
extent of 22,000,000 tons . . . yet the number of men 
who were employed in effecting this great movement had 
decreased in 1880, as compared with 1870, to the extent 
of about three thousand (2,990 exacdy). What did it? The 
introduction of steam-hoisting machines and grain eleva- 
tors upon the wharves and docks, the employment of 
steam power, etc. . . . 

In 1873 Bessemer steel in England, where its price 
had not been enhanced by protective duties, com- 
manded $80 per ton; in 1886 it was profitably manufac- 
tured and sold in the same country for less than $20 per 
ton. Within the same time the annual production capac- 
ity of a Bessemer converter has been increased fourfold, 
with no increase but rather a diminution of the involved 
labor. . . . 

The power capacity already being exerted by the 
steam engines of the world in existence and working in 
the year 1 887 has been estimated by the Bureau of Statis- 
tics at Berlin as equivalent to that of 200,000,000 horses, 
representing approximately 1,000,000,000 men; or at least 
three times the working population of the earth. 

One would think that this last figure would have caused Mr. Wells to 
pause, and wonder why there was any employment left in the world of 
1889 at all; but he merely concluded, with restrained pessimism, that 
“under such circumstances industrial overproduction . . . may become 
chronic.” 



36 Economics in One Lesson 


In the depression of 1932, the game of blaming unemployment 
on the machines started all over again. Within a few months the doc- 
trines of a group calling themselves the Technocrats had spread 
through the country like a forest fire. I shall not weary the reader with 
a recital of the fantastic figures put forward by this group or with cor- 
rections to show what the real facts were. It is enough to say that the 
Technocrats returned to the error in all its native purity that machines 
permanendy displace men — except that, in their ignorance, they pre- 
sented this error as a new and revolutionary discovery of their own. 
It was simply one more illustration of Santayana’s aphorism that those 
who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it. 

The Technocrats were finally laughed out of existence; but their 
doctrine, which preceded them, lingers on. It is reflected in hundreds 
of make-work rules and feather-bed practices by labor unions; and 
these rules and practices are tolerated and even approved because of 
the confusion on this point in the public mind. 

Testifying on behalf of the United States Department of Justice 
before the Temporary National Economic Committee (better known 
as the TNEC) in March, 1941, Corwin Edwards cited innumerable 
examples of such practices. The electrical union in New York City was 
charged with refusal to install electrical equipment made outside of 
New York State unless the equipment was disassembled and reassem- 
bled at the job site. In Houston, Texas, master plumbers and the 
plumbing union agreed that piping prefabricated for installation 
would be installed by the union only if the thread were cut off one 
end of the pipe and new thread were cut at the job site. Various locals 
of the painters’ union imposed restrictions on the use of spray guns, 
restrictions in many cases designed merely to make work by requiring 
the slower process of applying paint with a brush. A local of the 
teamsters’ union required that every truck entering the New York 
metropolitan area have a local driver in addition to the driver already 
employed. In various cities the electrical union required that if any 
temporary light or power was to be used on a construction job there 
must be a full-time maintenance electrician, who should not be per- 
mitted to do any electrical construction work. This rule, according to 
Mr. Edwards, “often involves the hiring of a man who spends his day 
reading or playing solitaire and does nothing except throw a switch at 
the beginning and end of the day.” 

One could go on to cite such make-work practices in many other 
fields. In the railroad industry, the unions insist that firemen be 
employed on types of locomotives that do not need them. In the the- 
aters unions insist on the use of scene shifters even in plays in which 
no scenery is used. The musicians’ union requires so-called “stand-in” 
musicians or even whole orchestras to be employed in many cases 
where only phonograph records are needed. 

2 

One might pile up mountains of figures to show how wrong were 
the technophobes of the past. But it would do no good unless we 
understood clearly why they were wrong. For statistics and history are 
useless in economics unless accompanied by a basic deductive under- 
standing of the facts — which means in this case an understanding of 
why the past consequences of the introduction of machinery and 
other labor-saving devices had to occur. Otherwise the technophobes 
will assert (as they do in fact assert when you point out to them that 
the prophecies of their predecessors turned out to be absurd): “That 
may have been all very well in the past; but today conditions are fun- 
damentally different; and now we simply cannot afford to develop any 
more labor-saving machinery.” Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, indeed, in a 
syndicated newspaper column of September 19, 1945, wrote: “We 
have reached a point today where labor-saving devices are good only 
when they do not throw the worker out of his job.” 

If it were indeed true that the introduction of labor-saving 
machinery is a cause of constantly mounting unemployment and mis- 
ery, the logical conclusions to be drawn would be revolutionary, not 
only in the technical field but for our whole concept of civili 2 ation. 
Not only should we have to regard all further technical progress as a 
calamity; we should have to regard all past technical progress with 
equal horror. Every day each of us in his own capacity is engaged in 
trying to reduce the effort it requires to accomplish a given result. 



38 Economics in One Lesson 


Each of us is trying to save his own labor, to economize the means 
required to achieve his ends. Every employer, small as well as large, 
seeks constandy to gain his results more economically and effi- 
ciently — that is, by saving labor. Every intelligent workman tries to cut 
down the effort necessary to accomplish his assigned job. The most 
ambitious of us try tirelessly to increase the results we can achieve in 
a given number of hours. The technophobes, if they were logical and 
consistent, would have to dismiss all this progress and ingenuity as not 
only useless but vicious. Why should freight be carried from New 
York to Chicago by railroads when we could employ enormously 
more men, for example, to carry it all on their backs? 

Theories as false as this are never held with logical consistency, but 
they do great harm because they are held at all. Let us, therefore, try 
to see exactly what happens when technical improvements and labor- 
saving machinery are introduced. The details will vary in each 
instance, depending upon the particular conditions that prevail in a 
given industry or period. But we shall assume an example that involves 
the main possibilities. 

Suppose a clothing manufacturer learns of a machine that will 
make men’s and women’s overcoats for half as much labor as previ- 
ously. He installs the machines and drops half his labor force. 

This looks at first glance like a clear loss of employment. But the 
machine itself required labor to make it; so here, as one offset, are 
jobs that would not otherwise have existed. The manufacturer, how- 
ever, would have adopted the machine only if it had either made bet- 
ter suits for half as much labor, or had made the same kind of suits 
at a smaller cost. If we assume the latter, we cannot assume that the 
amount of labor to make the machines was as great in terms of pay- 
rolls as the amount of labor that the clothing manufacturer hopes to 
save in the long run by adopting the machine; otherwise there would 
have been no economy, and he would not have adopted it. 

So there is still a net loss of employment to be accounted for. But 
we should at least keep in mind the real possibility that even the first 
effect of the introduction of labor-saving machinery may be to 
increase employment on net balance; because it is usually only in the 
long run that the clothing manufacturer expects to save money by 
adopting the machine: it may take several years for the machine to 
“pay for itself.” 

After the machine has produced economies sufficient to offset its 
cost, the clothing manufacturer has more profits than before. (We 
shall assume that he merely sells his coats for the same price as his 
competitors, and makes no effort to undersell them.) At this point, it 
may seem, labor has suffered a net loss of employment, while it is only 
the manufacturer, the capitalist, who has gained. But it is precisely out 
of these extra profits that the subsequent social gains must come. The 
manufacturer must use these extra profits in at least one of three ways, 
and possibly he will use part of them in all three: (1) he will use the 
extra profits to expand his operations by buying more machines to 
make more coats; or (2) he will invest the extra profits in some other 
industry; or (3) he will spend the extra profits on increasing his own 
consumption. Whichever of these three courses he takes, he will 
increase employment. 

In other words, the manufacturer, as a result of his economies, has 
profits that he did not have before. Every dollar of the amount he has 
saved in direct wages to former coat makers, he now has to pay out in 
indirect wages to the makers of the new machine, or to the workers 
in another capital industry, or to the makers of a new house or motor 
car for himself, or of jewelry and furs for his wife. In any case (unless 
he is a poindess hoarder) he gives indirecdy as many jobs as he ceased 
to give direcdy. 

But the matter does not and cannot rest at this stage. If this enter- 
prising manufacturer effects great economies as compared with his 
competitors, either he will begin to expand his operations at their 
expense, or they will start buying the machines too. Again more work 
will be given to the makers of the machines. But competition and pro- 
duction will then also begin to force down the price of overcoats. 
There will no longer be as great profits for those who adopt the new 
machines. The rate of profit of the manufacturers using the new 
machine will begin to drop, while the manufacturers who have still not 
adopted the machine may now make no profit at all. The savings, in 



40 Economics in One Lesson 


other words, will begin to be passed along to the buyers of over- 
coats — to the consumers. 

But as overcoats are now cheaper, more people will buy them. This 
means that, though it takes fewer people to make the same number of 
overcoats as before, more overcoats are now being made than before. 
If the demand for overcoats is what economists call “elastic” — that is, 
if a fall in the price of overcoats causes a larger total amount of 
money to be spent on overcoats than previously — then more people 
may be employed even in making overcoats than before the new 
labor-saving machine was introduced. We have already seen how this 
actually happened historically with stockings and other textiles. 

But the new employment does not depend on the elasticity of 
demand for the particular product involved. Suppose that, though the 
price of overcoats was almost cut in half — from a former price, say, 
of $50 to a new price of $30 — not a single additional coat was sold. 
The result would be that while consumers were as well provided with 
new overcoats as before, each buyer would now have $20 left over that 
he would not have had left over before. He will therefore spend this 
$20 for something else, and so provide increased employment in other 
lines. 

In brief, on net balance, machines, technological improvements, 
economies and efficiency do not throw men out of work. 

3 

Not all inventions and discoveries, of course, are “labor-saving” 
machines. Some of them, like precision instruments, like nylon, lucite, 
plywood, and plastics of all kinds, simply improve the quality of prod- 
ucts. Others, like the telephone or the airplane, perform operations 
that direct human labor could not perform at all. Still others bring into 
existence objects and services, such as X-rays, radios, and synthetic 
rubber, that would otherwise not even exist. But in the foregoing illus- 
tration we have taken precisely the kind of machine that has been the 
special object of modern technophobia. 

It is possible, of course, to push too far the argument that machines 
do not on net balance throw men out of work. It is sometimes 
argued, for example, that machines create more jobs than would oth- 
erwise have existed. Under certain conditions this may be true. They 
can certainly create enormously more jobs in particular trades. The eigh- 
teenth-century figures for the textile industries are a case in point. 
Their modern counterparts are certainly no less striking. In 1910, 
140,000 persons were employed in the United States in the newly cre- 
ated automobile industry. In 1920, as the product was improved and 
its cost reduced, the industry employed 250,000. In 1930, as this prod- 
uct improvement and cost reduction continued, employment in the 
industry was 380,000. In 1940 it had risen to 450,000. By 1940, 35,000 
people were employed in making electric refrigerators, and 60,000 
were in the radio industry. So it has been in one newly created trade 
after another, as the invention was improved and the cost reduced. 

There is also an absolute sense in which machines may be said to 
have enormously increased the number of jobs. The population of 
the world today is three times as great as in the middle of the eigh- 
teenth century, before the Industrial Revolution had got well under 
way. Machines may be said to have given birth to this increased pop- 
ulation; for without the machines, the world would not have been able 
to support it. Two out of every three of us, therefore, may be said to 
owe not only our jobs but our very lives to machines. 

Yet it is a misconception to think of the function or result of 
machines as primarily one of creating jobs. The real result of the 
machine is to increase production, to raise the standard of living, to 
increase economic welfare. It is no trick to employ everybody, even (or 
especially) in the most primitive economy. Full employment — very full 
employment; long, weary, back-breaking employment — is characteris- 
tic of precisely the nations that are most retarded industrially. Where 
full employment already exists, new machines, inventions, and discov- 
eries cannot — until there has been time for an increase in popula- 
tion — bring more employment. They are likely to bring more unem- 
ployment (but this time I am speaking of voluntary and not involuntary 
unemployment) because people can now afford to work fewer hours, 
while children and the overaged no longer need to work. 



42 Economics in One Lesson 


What machines do, to repeat, is to bring an increase in production 
and an increase in the standard of living. They may do this in either 
of two ways. They do it by making goods cheaper for consumers (as 
in our illustration of the overcoats), or they do it by increasing wages 
because they increase the productivity of the workers. In other words, 
they either increase money wages or, by reducing prices, they increase 
the goods and services that the same money wages will buy. Some- 
times they do both. What actually happens will depend in large part 
upon the monetary policy pursued in a country. But in any case, 
machines, inventions, and discoveries increase real wages. 

4 

A warning is necessary before we leave this subject. It was precisely 
the great merit of the classical economists that they looked for sec- 
ondary consequences, that they were concerned with the effects of a 
given economic policy or development in the long run and on the 
whole community. But it was also their defect that, in taking the long 
view and the broad view, they sometimes neglected to take also the 
short view and the narrow view. They were too often inclined to min- 
imize or to forget altogether the immediate effects of developments 
on special groups. We have seen, for example, that the English stock- 
ing knitters suffered real tragedies as a result of the introduction of 
the new stocking frames, one of the earliest inventions of the Indus- 
trial Revolution. 

But such facts and their modern counterparts have led some writ- 
ers to the opposite extreme of looking only at the immediate effects on 
certain groups. Joe Smith is thrown out of a job by the introduction 
of some new machine. “Keep your eye on |oe Smith,” these writers 
insist. “Never lose track of Joe Smith.” But what they then proceed to 
do is to keep their eyes only on Joe Smith, and to forget Tom Jones, 
who has just got a new job in making the new machine, and Ted 
Brown, who has just got a job operating one, and Daisy Miller, who 
can now buy a coat for half what it used to cost her. And because they 
think only of Joe Smith, they end by advocating reactionary and non- 
sensical policies. 

Yes, we should keep at least one eye on Joe Smith. He has been 
thrown out of a job by the new machine. Perhaps he can soon get 
another job, even a better one. But perhaps, also, he has devoted many 
years of his life to acquiring and improving a special skill for which the 
market no longer has any use. He has lost this investment in himself, in 
his old skill, just as his former employer, perhaps, has lost his investment 
in old machines or processes suddenly rendered obsolete. He was a 
skilled workman, and paid as a skilled workman. Now he has become 
overnight an unskilled workman again, and can hope, for the present, 
only for the wages of an unskilled workman, because the one skill he had 
is no longer needed. We cannot and must not forget Joe Smith. His is 
one of the personal tragedies that, as we shall see, are incident to nearly 
all industrial and economic progress. 

To ask precisely what course we should follow with Joe Smith — 
whether we should let him make his own adjustment, give him sepa- 
ration pay or unemployment compensation, put him on relief, or train 
him at government expense for a new job — would carry us beyond 
the point that we are here trying to illustrate. The central lesson is that 
we should try to see all the main consequences of any economic pol- 
icy or development — the immediate effects on special groups, and the 
long-run effects on all groups. 

If we have devoted considerable space to this issue, it is because 
our conclusions regarding the effects of new machinery, inventions 
and discoveries on employment, production and welfare are crucial. If 
we are wrong about these, there are few things in economics about 
which we are likely to be right. 

