Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Chapter 8 

Spread-the-Work Schemes 


I have referred to various union make-work and featherbed prac- 
tices. These practices, and the public toleration of them, spring 
from the same fundamental fallacy as the fear of machines. This is the 
belief that a more efficient way of doing a thing destroys jobs, and its 
necessary corollary that a less efficient way of doing it creates them. 

Allied to this fallacy is the belief that there is just a fixed amount of 
work to be done in the world, and that, if we cannot add to this work by 
thinking up more cumbersome ways of doing it, at least we can think of 
devices for spreading it around among as large a number of people as 
possible. 

This error lies behind the minute subdivision of labor upon which 
unions insist. In the building trades in large cities the subdivision is 
notorious. Bricklayers are not allowed to use stones for a chimney: that 
is the special work of stonemasons. An electrician cannot rip out a 
board to fix a connection and put it back again: that is the special job, 
no matter how simple it may be, of the carpenters. A plumber will not 
remove or put back a tile incident to fixing a leak in the shower: that is 
the job of a tile setter. 

Furious “jurisdictional” strikes are fought among unions for the 
exclusive right to do certain types of borderline jobs. In a statement 
recently prepared by the American railroads for the Attorney General’s 


45 



46 Economics in One Lesson 


Committee on Administrative Procedure, the railroads gave innumer- 
able examples in which the National Railroad Adjustment Board had 
decided that 

each separate operation on the railroad, no matter how 
minute, such as talking over a telephone or spiking or 
unspiking a switch, is so far an exclusive property of a 
particular class of employee that if an employee of 
another class, in the course of his regular duties, per- 
forms such operations he must not only be paid an extra 
day’s wages for doing so, but at the same time the fur- 
loughed or unemployed members of the class held to be 
entitled to perform the operation must be paid a day’s 
wages for not having been called upon to perform it. 

It is true that a few persons can profit at the expense of the rest 
of us from this minute arbitrary subdivision of labor — provided it 
happens in their case alone. But those who support it as a general 
practice fail to see that it always raises production costs; that it results 
on net balance in less work done and in fewer goods produced. The 
householder who is forced to employ two men to do the work of one 
has, it is true, given employment to one extra man. But he has just 
that much less money left over to spend on something that would 
employ somebody else. Because his bathroom leak has been repaired 
at double what it should have cost, he decides not to buy the new 
sweater he wanted. “Labor” is no better off, because a day’s employ- 
ment of an unneeded tilesetter has meant a day’s employment of a 
sweater knitter or machine handler. The householder, however, is 
worse off. Instead of having a repaired shower and a sweater, he has 
the shower and no sweater. And if we count the sweater as part of 
the national wealth, the country is short one sweater. This symbolizes 
the net result of the effort to make extra work by arbitrary subdivi- 
sion of labor. 

But there are other schemes for “spreading the work” often put 
forward by union spokesmen and legislators. The most frequent of 
these is the proposal to shorten the working week, usually by law The 
belief that it would “spread the work” and “give more jobs” was one 
of the main reasons behind the inclusion of the penalty-overtime pro- 
vision in the existing Federal Wage-Hour Law The previous legisla- 
tion in the States, forbidding the employment of women or minors 
for more, say, than forty-eight hours a week, was based on the convic- 
tion that longer hours were injurious to health and morale. Some of it 
was based on the belief that longer hours were harmful to efficiency. 
But the provision in the Federal law, that an employer must pay a 
worker a 50 percent premium above his regular hourly rate of wages 
for all hours worked in any week above forty, was not based primarily 
on the belief that forty- five hours a week, say, was injurious either to 
health or efficiency. It was inserted partly in the hope of boosting the 
worker’s weekly income, and partly in the hope that, by discouraging 
the employer from taking on anyone regularly for more than forty 
hours a week, it would force him to employ additional workers 
instead. At the time of writing this, there are many schemes for 
“averting unemployment” by enacting a thirty-hour week. 

What is the actual effect of such plans, whether enforced by indi- 
vidual unions or by legislation? It will clarify the problem if we con- 
sider two cases. The first is a reduction in the standard working week 
from forty hours to thirty without any change in the hourly rate of 
pay. The second is a reduction in the working week from forty hours 
to thirty, but with a sufficient increase in hourly wage rates to main- 
tain the same weekly pay for the individual workers already employed. 

Let us take the first case. We assume that the working week is cut 
from forty hours to thirty, with no change in hourly pay. If there is 
substantial unemployment when this plan is put into effect, the plan 
will no doubt provide additional jobs. We cannot assume that it will 
provide sufficient additional jobs, however, to maintain the same pay- 
rolls and the same number of man-hours as before, unless we make 
the unlikely assumptions that in each industry there has been exactly 
the same percentage of unemployment and that the new men and 
women employed are no less efficient at their special tasks on the 
average than those who had already been employed. But suppose we 



48 Economics in One Lesson 


do make these assumptions. Suppose we do assume that the right 
number of additional workers of each skill is available, and that the 
new workers do not raise production costs. What will be the result of 
reducing the working week from forty hours to thirty (without any 
increase in hourly pay)? 

Though more workers will be employed, each will be working fewer 
hours, and there will, therefore, be no net increase in man-hours. It is 
unlikely that there will be any significant increase in production. Total 
payrolls and “purchasing power” will be no larger. All that will have 
happened, even under the most favorable assumptions (which would 
seldom be realized) is that the workers previously employed will subsi- 
dize, in effect, the workers previously unemployed. For in order that 
the new workers will individually receive three-fourths as many dollars 
a week as the old workers used to receive, the old workers will them- 
selves now individually receive only three-fourths as many dollars a 
week as previously. It is true that the old workers will now work fewer 
hours; but this purchase of more leisure at a high price is presumably 
not a decision they have made for its own sake: it is a sacrifice made to 
provide others with jobs. 

The labor union leaders who demand shorter weeks to “spread the 
work” usually recognize this, and therefore they put the proposal for- 
ward in a form in which everyone is supposed to eat his cake and have 
it too. Reduce the working week from forty hours to thirty, they tell 
us, to provide more jobs; but compensate for the shorter week by 
increasing the hourly rate of pay by 33 31 /4t percent. The workers 
employed, say, were previously getting an average of $40 a week for 
forty hours work; in order that they may still get $40 for only thirty 
hours work, the hourly rate of pay must be advanced to an average of 

$1.33 “/«. 

What would be the consequences of such a plan? The first and 
most obvious consequence would be to raise costs of production. If 
we assume that the workers, when previously employed for forty 
hours, were getting less than the level of production costs, prices, and 
profits made possible, then they could have got the hourly increase 
without reducing the length of the working week. They could, in other 
words, have worked the same number of hours and got their total 
weekly incomes increased by one-third, instead of merely getting, as they 
are under the new thirty-hour week, the same weekly income as 
before. But if, under the forty-hour week, the workers were already 
getting as high a wage as the level of production costs and prices 
made possible (and the very unemployment they are trying to cure 
may be a sign that they were already getting even more than this), then 
the increase in production costs as a result of the 33V4* percent 
increase in hourly wage rates will be much greater than the existing 
state of prices, production, and costs can stand. 

The result of the higher wage rate, therefore, will be a much greater 
unemployment than before. The least efficient firms will be thrown out 
of business, and the least efficient workers will be thrown out of jobs. 
Production will be reduced all around the circle. Higher production 
costs and scarcer supplies will tend to raise prices, so that workers can 
buy less with the same dollar wages; on the other hand, the increased 
unemployment will shrink demand and hence tend to lower prices. 
What ultimately happens to the prices of goods will depend upon what 
monetary policies are then followed. But if a policy of monetary infla- 
tion is pursued, to enable prices to rise so that the increased hourly 
wages can be paid, this will merely be a disguised way of reducing real 
wage rates, so that these will return, in terms of the amount of goods 
they can purchase, to the same real rate as before. The result would 
then be the same as if the working week had been reduced without an 
increase in hourly wage rates. And the results of that have already been 
discussed. 

The spread-the-work schemes, in brief, rest on the same sort of 
illusion that we have been considering. The people who support such 
schemes think only of the employment they would provide for partic- 
ular persons or groups; they do not stop to consider what their whole 
effect would be on everybody. 

The spread-the-work schemes rest also, as we began by pointing 
out, on the false assumption that there is just a fixed amount of work 
to be done. There could be no greater fallacy. There is no limit to the 
amount of work to be done as long as any human need or wish that 



50 Economics in One Lesson 


work could fill remains unsatisfied. In a modern exchange economy, 
the most work will be done when prices, costs, and wages are in the 
best relations to each other. What these relations are we shall later 
consider. 

