Economics in One Lesson 
By Henry Hazlitt

Chapter 10 

The Fetish of Full Employment 


The economic goal of any nation, as of any individual, is to get the 
greatest results with the least effort. The whole economic 
progress of mankind has consisted in getting more production with 
the same labor. It is for this reason that men began putting burdens on 
the backs of mules instead of on their own; that they went on to invent 
the wheel and the wagon, the railroad and the motor truck. It is for this 
reason that men used their ingenuity to develop 100,000 labor-saving 
inventions. 

All this is so elementary that one would blush to state it if it were 
not being constantly forgotten by those who coin and circulate the new 
slogans. Translated into national terms, this first principle means that 
our real objective is to maximize production. In doing this, full employ- 
ment — that is, the absence of involuntary idleness — becomes a neces- 
sary by-product. But production is the end, employment merely the 
means. We cannot continuously have the fullest production without 
full employment. But we can very easily have full employment without 
full production. 

Primitive tribes are naked, and wretchedly fed and housed, but 
they do not suffer from unemployment. China and India are incom- 
parably poorer than ourselves, but the main trouble from which they 
suffer is primitive production methods (which are both a cause and a 


55 



56 Economics in One Lesson 


consequence of a shortage of capital) and not unemployment. Noth- 
ing is easier to achieve than full employment, once it is divorced from 
the goal of full production and taken as an end in itself. Hider pro- 
vided full employment with a huge armament program. The war pro- 
vided full employment for every nation involved. The slave labor in 
Germany had full employment. Prisons and chain gangs have full 
employment. Coercion can always provide full employment. 

Yet our legislators do not present Full Production bills in Congress 
but Full Employment bills. Even committees of businessmen recom- 
mend “a President’s Commission on Full Employment,” not on Full 
Production, or even on Full Employment and Full Production. Every- 
where the means is erected into the end, and the end itself is forgot- 
ten. 

Wages and employment are discussed as if they had no relation to 
productivity and output. On the assumption that there is only a fixed 
amount of work to be done, the conclusion is drawn that a thirty-hour 
week will provide more jobs and will therefore be preferable to a 
forty-hour week. A hundred make-work practices of labor unions are 
confusedly tolerated. When a Petrillo threatens to put a radio station 
out of business unless it employs twice as many musicians as it needs, 
he is supported by part of the public because he is after all merely try- 
ing to create jobs. When we had our WPA, it was considered a mark 
of genius for the administrators to think of projects that employed 
the largest number of men in relation to the value of the work per- 
formed — in other words, in which labor was least efficient. 

It would be far better, if that were the choice — which it isn’t — to 
have maximum production with part of the population supported in 
idleness by undisguised relief than to provide “full employment” by so 
many forms of disguised make-work that production is disorganized. 
The progress of civilization has meant the reduction of employment, 
not its increase. It is because we have become increasingly wealthy as 
a nation that we have been able to virtually eliminate child labor, to 
remove the necessity of work for many of the aged and to make it 
unnecessary for millions of women to take jobs. A much smaller pro- 
portion of the American population needs to work than that, say, of 



The Fetish of Full Fmployment 57 


China or of Russia. The real question is not whether there will be 
50,000,000 or 60,000,000 jobs in America in 1950, but how much shall 
we produce, and what, in consequence, will be our standard of living? 
The problem of distribution, on which all the stress is being put today, 
is after all more easily solved the more there is to distribute. 

We can clarify our thinking if we put our chief emphasis where it 
belongs — on policies that will maximize production. 

