BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 11

On the Blush of Modesty

Your friend and I have had a conversation. He is a man of abil-
ity; his very first words showed what spirit and understanding he
possesses, and what progress he has already made. He gave me a
foretaste, and he will not fail to answer thereto. For he spoke not
from forethought, but was suddenly caught off his guard. When
he tried to collect himself, he could scarcely banish that hue of
modesty, which is a good sign in a young man; the blush that
spread over his face seemed so to rise from the depths. And I
feel sure that his habit of blushing will stay with him after he has
strengthened his character, stripped off all his faults, and become
wise. For by no wisdom can natural weaknesses of the body be
removed. That which is implanted and inborn can be toned down
by training, but not overcome.
The steadiest speaker, when before the public, often breaks
into a perspiration, as if he had wearied or over-heated himself;
some tremble in the knees when they rise to speak; I know of
some whose teeth chatter, whose tongues falter, whose lips quiver.
Training and experience can never shake off this habit; nature
exerts her own power and through such a weakness makes her
presence known even to the strongest.
I know that the blush, too, is a habit of this sort, spreading
suddenly over the faces of the most dignified men. It is, indeed
more prevalent in youth, because of the warmer blood and the
sensitive countenance; nevertheless, both seasoned men and
aged men are affected by it. Some are most dangerous when they
redden, as if they were letting all their sense of shame escape.
Sulla, when the blood mantled his cheeks, was in his fiercest
mood. Pompey had the most sensitive cast of countenance; he
always blushed in the presence of a gathering, and especially at a
public assembly. Fabianus also, I remember, reddened when he
appeared as a witness before the senate; and his embarrassment
became him to a remarkable degree.
Such a habit is not due to mental weakness, but to the novelty of
a situation; an inexperienced person is not necessarily confused,
but is usually affected, because he slips into this habit by natural
tendency of the body. Just as certain men are full-blooded, so
others are of a quick and mobile blood, that rushes to the face
at once.
As I remarked, Wisdom can never remove this habit; for if she
could rub out all our faults, she would be mistress of the universe.
Whatever is assigned to us by the terms of our birth and the blend
in our constitutions, will stick with us, no matter how hard or
how long the soul may have tried to master itself. And we cannot
forbid these feelings any more than we can summon them.
Actors in the theatre, who imitate the emotions, who portray
fear and nervousness, who depict sorrow, imitate bashfulness by
hanging their heads, lowering their voices, and keeping their eyes
fixed and rooted upon the ground. They cannot, however, muster
a blush; for the blush cannot be prevented or acquired. Wisdom
will not assure us of a remedy, or give us help against it; it comes
or goes unbidden, and is a law unto itself.
But my letter calls for its closing sentence. Hear and take to
heart this useful and wholesome motto:[1] “Cherish some man
of high character, and keep him ever before your eyes, living as
if he were watching you, and ordering all your actions as if he
beheld them.”
Such, my dear Lucilius, is the counsel of Epicurus;[2] he has
quite properly given us a guardian and an attendant. We can get
rid of most sins, if we have a witness who stands near us when we
are likely to go wrong. The soul should have someone whom it
can respect—one by whose authority it may make even its inner
shrine more hallowed.[3] Happy is the man who can make others
better, not merely when he is in their company, but even when he
is in their thoughts! And happy also is he who can so revere a man
as to calm and regulate himself by calling him to mind! One who
can so revere another, will soon be himself worthy of reverence.
Choose therefore a Cato; or, if Cato seems too severe a model,
choose some Laelius, a gentler spirit. Choose a master whose life,
conversation, and soul-expressing face have satisfied you; picture
him always to yourself as your protector or your pattern. For we
must indeed have someone according to whom we may regulate
our characters; you can never straighten that which is crooked
unless you use a ruler. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Epicurus, Frag. 210 Usener.
2. Frag. 210 Usener.
3. The figure is taken from the ἄδυτον, the Holy of Holies in a temple. Cf.
Vergil, Aeneid, vi. 10 secreta Sibyllas.

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS

How To Be A Stoic:

An Interview With Author Elif Batuman

There’s been quite a surge of stories on Stoicism lately—appear-
ing everywhere from influential blogs to prestigious outlets
like Sports Illustrated, New York Times, The Guardian and The
Atlantic. One of the pieces that caught our attention was “How
to Be a Stoic” in The New Yorker. It’s by Elif Batuman (Twitter:
@BananaKarenina), a staff writer at The New Yorker and author
of the acclaimed The Idiot and The Possessed: Adventures with
Russian Books and the People Who Read Them. Her stories have
appeared in Best American Travel Writing and Best American
Essays anthologies.
Her piece is a wonderful exploration of Epictetus and so the
Daily Stoic team reached out to learn more about Elif and her
relation to Stoicism. How does she use it on a day-to-day basis?
What are the common misconceptions about the philosophy?

How did she first discover it? What are some characters in litera-
ture that embody Stoicism? Was there anything off-putting about
a philosophy that appears to have a ‘male-bent’?
We are grateful to Elif for agreeing to do this interview and her
generous answers which you can read below. Enjoy!
History tends to show that Stoicism is often popular during
times of difficulty or uncertainty. Was that true in your case? I
was curious if you could give our readers a bit of a background
regarding your story of discovering Epictetus and how it has
helped you?
Yes, I had just started a new job in a new country (Turkey),
where there was a certain amount of political tension. I was also
in the middle of a problematic long-distance relationship, and
living in a remote area. I had gotten really behind on work in the
previous months (my first book, The Possessed, had just come out,
so I was doing travel and publicity for that, and then also I had had
some personal issues), and had deliberately sought out this kind
of isolated living situation so I could catch up, but then I ended
up feeling really lost and alone. I was also doing some reporting,
I was working on a story for the New Yorker about soccer fan
groups in Istanbul, which involved hanging out with a milieu I
wasn’t really used to, often late at night—it was a stressful time.
You mentioned that you first discovered Epictetus back in 2011
and you wrote about him more than five years later. Did you
read any of the other Stoics in between? I can only assume he
made a strong impression on you and was wondering how often
did his ideas come to mind over the years in your daily life?
Was it something that was a constant presence or it was more
in specific situations?
That piece I wrote was just about Epictetus, and I only had 750
words, so it’s a bit schematic. My actual route to the Stoics was
more circuitous. I’m sure I had been introduced to Stoic ideas in
the past, but the first time they really registered with me was in
Istanbul in 2010 or 2011 when I read Sarah Bakewell’s wonderful
How to Live: Or A Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty
Attempts at an Answer. It’s kind of a self-help book in the form of
biographical essays about Montaigne. For me, all the most helpful
advice came from the Stoics. (Montaigne as you probably know
was really influenced by Stoicism, especially Seneca, though also
Epictetus, and also the Epicureans.) I wanted to know more about
the Stoics, so I bought A Guide to the Good Life: The Art of Stoic
Joy, by William B. Irvine, which was a terrific introduction to the
basic ideas and how they could be applied to daily life. After that
I read Seneca’s Dialogues and Essays, Marcus Aurelius’s Medita-
tions, and Epictetus’s Enchiridion.

I liked Marcus Aurelius and Seneca, too, but Epictetus was
definitely my favorite—I think he’s the funniest. With Marcus
Aurelius you have this world-weary emperor who is kind of a
mystic; Seneca writes in this flowery Latin, he’s a famous tragedian
and a speechwriter for Nero, so he has that whole thing going;
but Epictetus is born a slave, and then he becomes a teacher, and
all he cares about is teaching. I was teaching undergraduates at
the time, and I felt like Epictetus had been working on this same
eternal puzzle that I was, of how to get young people to do what’s
difficult, to make them think that things are worthwhile, to rally
their spirits, and it felt like finding this great friend and ally.
After I read the Enchiridion, I got the Discourses and Selected
Writings, the Penguin Classics one edited by Robert Dobbin,
which was marvelous, even better than the Enchiridion I had
downloaded for free online somewhere. Next I tried reading
Musonius Rufus, Epictetus’s teacher—he was great, too, but I
thought the ideas were more forcefully expressed in Epictetus.
Then I read Tad Brennan’s The Stoic Life, where he summarizes a
lot of Chrysippus’s ideas, but you know, Chrysippus really isn’t for
me, the whole thing about how everyone who isn’t 100% wise is
100% “vicious” seems kind of theoretical and alienating to me. I
prefer what I take to be Epictetus’s view, viz. that we’re all strug-
gling constantly, none of us will be perfect, but we can always get
better, and that improvement is not just not worthless, it’s actually
the most meaningful thing there is.

At least online (and of course, historically) Stoicism seems
to have a predominant number of males. Many of them hear
about it from action movies like Gladiator or the military or
now, with its popularity in sports, it might get passed to them
in the locker room. I’m curious about two things. One, as a
woman, was there anything off putting about that male-bent?
Two, since the actual philosophy itself is universal and can
help anyone, what can be done to recreate your experience and
exposure to philosophy?

Well, I never saw Gladiator and have never served in the mili-
tary or spent much time in a men’s locker room, so I can’t really
speak to the “male bent” that Stoicism might have in those venues.
As a reader in the privacy of my home, I didn’t find there was
anything off-puttingly male about Stoic philosophy. I guess Epi-
ctetus talks about beards in a way I can’t really identify with, but
I don’t think that’s a major cornerstone of his belief. And Muso-
nius Rufus wrote in a really moving way about how he thought
women and men should have the same education in philosophy,
that women are just as capable as men of applying and benefiting
from philosophical ideas. And Seneca does write those letters to
women, including his mother, so clearly he thinks Stoicism can
help women.
I think there’s a common misconception about Stoicism, that
it’s about forcing yourself to somehow not feel emotions; that’s
probably an idea that would appeal more to men than to women
(since, from childhood, boys are encouraged to be macho, while
girls are encouraged to be in touch with their emotions). But the
thing I love about Epictetus is that it’s really all about handling
emotions. He’s like, “You’re definitely going to feel this incredibly
powerful thing, but guess what, it’s not a law that dictates what
you think or how you act—you’re perfectly free, and in fact duty-
bound, to consult your reason and say, ‘OK, feeling, duly noted,
but you are just a feeling and not the truth.’” I think that’s maybe
an especially useful message for women, because of how little
girls are educated, or at least how they were when I was little. I
think for a lot of women (as well as men), there’s a tendency to
think: “Oh my God, I already felt this, so the bad thing already
happened.” And Epictetus is all about realizing, “Bro, nothing bad
has happened yet, everyone has feelings, now just take a moment
and evaluate what the truth is.”
In your New Yorker piece, you mention Epictetus’s line about
ignoring small slights—“For such a small price, I buy tranquil-
ity,” and how useful it has been. Are there other exercises or
quotes that you’d point to as practical and helpful?
Oh man, I use so many of them every day. Definitely, the one
about the bathhouse: “If you are heading out to bathe, picture to
yourself the typical scene at the bathhouse—people splashing,
pushing, yelling and pinching your clothes. You will complete the
act with more composure if you say at the outset, ‘I want a bath,
but at the same time I want to keep my will aligned with nature.’”
I actually thought that at a hamam in Istanbul once and it really
helped! I use it all the time on the subway and also at the airport.

Another great trick is when he’s like, “You know how if some-
one else tells you that something bad happened to them, you’re
like, ‘Oh, too bad, that’s life,’ but if something bad happens to
you, you’re like, ‘I am the unhappiest of mortals?’” Oh I found
the quote: “When somebody’s wife or child dies, to a man we all
routinely say, ‘Well, that’s part of life.’ But if one of our own family
is involved, then right away it’s ‘Poor, poor me!’ We would do bet-
ter to remember how we react when a similar loss afflicts others.”

I haven’t had to use that one with a big loss, but for little things
it really works. Last week I was having bureaucratic trouble with
my health insurance. I imagined I was listening to a friend tell
me about making such calls, and thought about how I would be
like, “Oh, too bad, insurance can be a pain”—I definitely wouldn’t
have been like, “Oh my God, you unfortunate person, your whole
week must have been ruined, what did you do wrong that this
happened to you, how could you have avoided it?”—which is kind
of how I felt about it myself, when I didn’t stop to think about it.
You are both a fantastic writer and a scholar—writing for the
New Yorker, n+1, Harper’s Magazine among others and you
hold a doctoral degree from Stanford in comparative litera-
ture. I’d love to know if there are any fictional characters that
you think embody Stoicism that you can point us to? Or any
other works of fiction that you think readers would love? (Also
I want to ask if you’ve read Memoirs of Hadrian by Marguerite
Yourcenar?)
I actually find Stoicism to be very present in the works of Char-
lotte Bronte’s novels Jane Eyre and Villette. (She calls it “stoicism”
or “Christian stoicism” or “Christian composure.”) Both those
novels are about a young woman who really has no social value
in the Victorian social marketplace—poor, orphaned, no social
connections, not beautiful—Bronte is really cold and brutal about
this. Those girls don’t have a single thing you need to make a good
marriage, which at that time is the only thing standing between
an unconnected young woman and a whole humiliating, possibly
long, life as a drudge and a dependent. There are these amazing
passages in both books, towards the end, where the character
realizes (or thinks she realizes) that love isn’t going to work out
for her, that the guy who she thought liked her is going to maybe
choose someone a little younger, richer, or more beautiful—so
she resigns herself to being a teacher, to doing her duty, to a life
without romance—and you really feel both the difficulty and the
freedom of that resignation. It’s really brutal and moving.
Dostoevsky has some pretty stoical characters, too, like Father
Zossima in The Brothers Karamazov. Of course he’s also a Chri-
stian. In general if you’re talking about the 19th-century Euro-
pean novel (my grad school beat...), Stoicism is going to be in
there through some version of Christianity. But I mean the affinity
between Stoicism and Christian thought is one of the ways Stoi-
cism has survived since antiquity.

Epictetus does also make a cameo in J.D. Salinger’s Franny
and Zooey.
I know you have a new book out, this time “a novel about not
just discovering but inventing oneself.” Can you tell us a bit
more about it? I also wanted to say that the cover is absolutely
beautiful.
Thank you! I love the cover. It’s a semi-autobiographical novel
called The Idiot. The main character, Selin, is 18, the book takes
place in her first year of college, and she’s a perfect example of
someone who doesn’t know about Stoicism, who takes emotions
for truth and finds signs everywhere, in all her almost physical,
visceral, emotional reactions—and then every now and then she
stops and is like “Are you fucking kidding me? This is life?” I’m
hoping to write more books about Selin in the future, and, if I
live long enough, I would love to do one where she discovers
Epictetus.
