BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 27

On the Good Which Abides

“What,” say you, “are you giving me advice? Indeed, have you
already advised yourself, already corrected your own faults? Is this
the reason why you have leisure to reform other men?” No, I am
not so shameless as to undertake to cure my fellow-men when I
am ill myself. I am, however, discussing with you troubles which
concern us both, and sharing the remedy with you, just as if we
were lying ill in the same hospital. Listen to me, therefore, as you
would if I were talking to myself. I am admitting you to my inmost
thoughts, and am having it out with myself, merely making use
of you as my pretext.
I keep crying out to myself: “Count your years, and you will
be ashamed to desire and pursue the same things you desired
in your boyhood days. Of this one thing make sure against
your dying day—let your faults die before you die. Away with
those disordered pleasures, which must be dearly paid for; it is
not only those which are to come that harm me, but also those
which have come and gone. Just as crimes, even if they have not
been detected when they were committed, do not allow anxiety
to end with them; so with guilty pleasures, regret remains even
after the pleasures are over. They are not substantial, they are not
trustworthy; even if they do not harm us, they are fleeting.
Cast about rather for some good which will abide. But there can
be no such good except as the soul discovers it for itself within
itself. Virtue alone affords everlasting and peace-giving joy; even
if some obstacle arise, it is but like an intervening cloud, which
floats beneath the sun but never prevails against it.”
When will it be your lot to attain this joy? Thus far, you have
indeed not been sluggish, but you must quicken your pace. Much
toil remains; to confront it, you must yourself lavish all your
waking hours, and all your efforts, if you wish the result to be
accomplished. This matter cannot be delegated to someone else.
The other kind of literary activity[1] admits of outside assistance.
Within our own time there was a certain rich man named
Calvisius Sabinus; he had the bank-account and the brains of a
freedman.[2] I never saw a man whose good fortune was a greater
offence against propriety. His memory was so faulty that he would
sometimes forget the name of Ulysses, or Achilles, or Priam—
names which we know as well as we know those of our own
attendants. No major-domo in his dotage, who cannot give men
their right names, but is compelled to invent names for them—no
such man, I say, calls off the names[3] of his master’s tribesmen
so atrociously as Sabinus used to call off the Trojan and Achaean
heroes. But none the less did he desire to appear learned.
So he devised this short cut to learning: he paid fabulous prices
for slaves—one to know Homer by heart and another to know
Hesiod; he also delegated a special slave to each of the nine lyric
poets. You need not wonder that he paid high prices for these
slaves; if he did not find them ready to hand he had them made to
order. After collecting this retinue, he began to make life miserable
for his guests; he would keep these fellows at the foot of his couch,
and ask them from time to time for verses which he might repeat,
and then frequently break down in the middle of a word.

Satellius Quadratus, a feeder, and consequently a fawner, upon
addle-pated millionaires, and also (for this quality goes with the
other two) a flouter of them, suggested to Sabinus that he should
have philologists to gather up the bits.[4] Sabinus remarked that
each slave cost him one hundred thousand sesterces; Satellius
replied: “You might have bought as many book-cases for a smaller
sum.” But Sabinus held to the opinion that what any member of
his household knew, he himself knew also.
This same Satellius began to advise Sabinus to take wrestling
lessons—sickly, pale, and thin as he was, Sabinus answered: “How
can I? I can scarcely stay alive now.” “Don’t say that, I implore you,”
replied the other, “consider how many perfectly healthy slaves you
have!” No man is able to borrow or buy a sound mind; in fact,
as it seems to me, even though sound minds were for sale, they
would not find buyers. Depraved minds, however, are bought
and sold every day.
But let me pay off my debt and say farewell: “Real wealth is
poverty adjusted to the law of Nature.”[5] Epicurus has this saying
in various ways and contexts; but it can never be repeated too
often, since it can never be learned too well. For some persons
the remedy should be merely prescribed; in the case of others, it
should be forced down their throats. Farewell.

Footnotes

1. i.e., ordinary studies, or literature, as contrasted with philosophy.
2. Compare with the following the vulgarities of Trimalchio in the Satire of
Petronius, and the bad taste of Nasidienus in Horace (Sat. ii. 8).
3. At the salutatio, or morning call. The position of nomenclator, “caller-of-
names,” was originally devoted more strictly to political purposes. Here it is
primarily social.
4. i.e., all the ideas that dropped out of the head of Sabinus. The slave who
picked up the crumbs was called analecta.
5. Epicurus, Frag. 477 Usener.
