BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 31

On Siren Songs

Now I recognize my Lucilius! He is beginning to reveal the char-
acter of which he gave promise. Follow up the impulse which
prompted you to make for all that is best, treading under your feet
that which is approved by the crowd. I would not have you greater
or better than you planned; for in your case the mere foundations
have covered a large extent of ground; only finish all that you have
laid out, and take in hand the plans which you have had in mind.
In short, you will be a wise man, if you stop up your ears; nor
is it enough to close them with wax; you need a denser stopple
than that which they say Ulysses used for his comrades. The song
which he feared was alluring, but came not from every side; the
song, however, which you have to fear, echoes round you not
from a single headland, but from every quarter of the world. Sail,
therefore, not past one region which you mistrust because of its
treacherous delights, but past every city. Be deaf to those who love
you most of all; they pray for bad things with good intentions.
And, if you would be happy, entreat the gods that none of their
fond desires for you may be brought to pass.
What they wish to have heaped upon you are not really good
things; there is only one good, the cause and the support of a
happy life—trust in oneself. But this cannot be attained, unless
one has learned to despise toil and to reckon it among the things
which are neither good nor bad. For it is not possible that a single
thing should be bad at one time and good at another, at times light
and to be endured, and at times a cause of dread.
Work is not a good.[1] Then what is a good? I say, the scorning
of work. That is why I should rebuke men who toil to no purpose.
But when, on the other hand, a man is struggling towards
honourable things, in proportion as he applies himself more and
more, and allows himself less and less to be beaten or to halt,[2]
I shall recommend his conduct and shout my encouragement,
saying: “By so much you are better! Rise, draw a fresh breath, and
surmount that hill, if possible, at a single spurt!”
Work is the sustenance of noble minds. There is, then, no
reason why, in accordance with that old vow of your parents,
you should pick and choose what fortune you wish should fall to
your lot, or what you should pray for; besides, it is base for a man
who has already travelled the whole round of highest honours to
be still importuning the gods. What need is there of vows? Make
yourself happy through your own efforts; you can do this, if once
you comprehend that whatever is blended with virtue is good,
and that whatever is joined to vice is bad. Just as nothing gleams
if it has no light blended with it, and nothing is black unless it
contains darkness or draws to itself something of dimness, and as
nothing is hot without the aid of fire, and nothing cold without
air; so it is the association of virtue and vice that makes things
honourable or base.
What then is good? The knowledge of things. What is evil?
The lack of knowledge of things. Your wise man, who is also a
craftsman, will reject or choose in each case as it suits the occasion;
but he does not fear that which he rejects, nor does he admire
that which he chooses, if only he has a stout and unconquerable
soul. I forbid you to be cast down or depressed. It is not enough
if you do not shrink from work; ask for it.

“But,” you say, “is not trifling and superfluous work, and work
that has been inspired by ignoble causes, a bad sort of work?” No;
no more than that which is expended upon noble endeavours,
since the very quality that endures toil and rouses itself to hard
and uphill effort, is of the spirit, which says: “Why do you grow
slack? It is not the part of a man to fear sweat.”
And besides this, in order that virtue may be perfect, there
should be an even temperament and a scheme of life that is
consistent with itself throughout; and this result cannot be
attained without knowledge of things, and without the art[3] which
enables us to understand things human and things divine. That
is the greatest good. If you seize this good, you begin to be the
associate of the gods, and not their suppliant.
“But how,” you ask, “does one attain that goal?” You do not need
to cross the Pennine or Graian[4] hills, or traverse the Candavian[5]
waste, or face the Syrtes,[6] or Scylla, or Charybdis, although you
have travelled through all these places for the bribe of a petty
governorship; the journey for which nature has equipped you is
safe and pleasant. She has given you such gifts that you may, if
you do not prove false to them, rise level with God.
Your money, however, will not place you on a level with God;
for God has no property. Your bordered robe[7] will not do this; for
God is not clad in raiment; nor will your reputation, nor a display
of self, nor a knowledge of your name wide-spread throughout
the world; for no one has knowledge of God; many even hold
him in low esteem, and do not suffer for so doing. The throng of
slaves which carries your litter along the city streets and in foreign
places will not help you; for this God of whom I speak, though
the highest and most powerful of beings, carries all things on his
own shoulders. Neither can beauty or strength make you blessed,
for none of these qualities can withstand old age.
What we have to seek for, then, is that which does not each
day pass more and more under the control of some power which
cannot be withstood.[8] And what is this? It is the soul—but the
soul that is upright, good, and great. What else could you call such
a soul than a god dwelling as a guest in a human body? A soul
like this may descend into a Roman knight just as well as into a
freedman’s son or a slave. For what is a Roman knight, or a freed-
men’s son, or a slave? They are mere titles, born of ambition or of
wrong. One may leap to heaven from the very slums. Only rise
And mould thyself to kinship with thy God.[9]
This moulding will not be done in gold or silver; an image that is
to be in the likeness of God cannot be fashioned of such materials;
remember that the gods, when they were kind unto men,[10] were
moulded in clay. Farewell.

Footnotes

1. The argument is that work is not, in itself, a good; if it were, it would
not be praiseworthy at one time and to be deprecated at another. It
belongs, therefore, to the class of things which the Stoics call ἀδιάφορα,
indifferentia, res mediae; cf. Cicero, de Fin. iii. 16.
2. Literally, “come to the end of his furrow.”
3. i.e., philosophy.
4. The Great St. Bernard and Little St. Bernard routes over the Alps.
5. A mountain in Illyria, over which the Via Egnatia ran.
6. Dangerous quick-sands along the north coast of Africa.
7. The toga praetexta, badge of the official position of Lucilius.
8. For example, Time or Chance.
9. Vergil, Aeneid, viii. 364 f.
10. In the Golden Age, described in Ep. xc., when men were nearest to nature
and “fresh from the gods.”
