BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 32

On Progress

I have been asking about you, and inquiring of everyone who
comes from your part of the country, what you are doing, and
where you are spending your time, and with whom. You cannot
deceive me; for I am with you. Live just as if I were sure to get
news of your doings, nay, as if I were sure to behold them. And if
you wonder what particularly pleases me that I hear concerning
you, it is that I hear nothing, that most of those whom I ask do
not know what you are doing.
This is sound practice—to refrain from associating with men of
different stamp and different aims. And I am indeed confident that
you cannot be warped, that you will stick to your purpose, even
though the crowd may surround and seek to distract you. What,
then, is on my mind? I am not afraid lest they work a change in
you; but I am afraid lest they may hinder your progress. And much
harm is done even by one who holds you back, especially since
life is so short; and we make it still shorter by our unsteadiness,
by making ever fresh beginnings at life, now one and immediately
another. We break up life into little bits, and fritter it away.
Hasten ahead, then, dearest Lucilius, and reflect how greatly
you would quicken your speed if an enemy were at your back, or
if you suspected the cavalry were approaching and pressing hard
upon your steps as you fled. It is true; the enemy is indeed pressing
upon you; you should therefore increase your speed and escape
away and reach a safe position, remembering continually what a
noble thing it is to round out your life before death comes, and
then await in peace the remaining portion of your time, claiming[1]
nothing for yourself, since you are in possession of the happy life;
for such a life is not made happier for being longer.
O when shall you see the time when you shall know that time
means nothing to you, when you shall be peaceful and calm,
careless of the morrow, because you are enjoying your life to the
full?
Would you know what makes men greedy for the future? It is
because no one has yet found himself. Your parents, to be sure,
asked other blessings for you; but I myself pray rather that you
may despise all those things which your parents wished for you in
abundance. Their prayers plunder many another person, simply
that you may be enriched. Whatever they make over to you must
be removed from someone else.
I pray that you may get such control over yourself that your
mind, now shaken by wandering thoughts, may at last come to
rest and be steadfast, that it may be content with itself and, having
attained an understanding of what things are truly good—and
they are in our possession as soon as we have this knowledge—
that it may have no need of added years. He has at length passed
beyond all necessities—he has won his honourable discharge and
is free—who still lives after his life has been completed. Farewell.

Footnotes

1. The text seems to be corrupt. Hense thinks that expectare is to be supplied
with nihil sibi—“To expect nothing for oneself ”; but the use of the verb
in two meanings would be harsh. The thought seems to be “asking for no
added years”; and one suspects that the loss of a word like adrogantem
before nihil.
