BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 35

On the Friendship of Kindred Minds

When I urge you so strongly to your studies, it is my own interest
which I am consulting; I want your friendship, and it cannot fall
to my lot unless you proceed, as you have begun, with the task
of developing yourself. For now, although you love me, you are
not yet my friend. “But,” you reply, “are these words of different
meaning?” Nay, more, they are totally unlike in meaning.[1] A
friend loves you, of course; but one who loves you is not in every
case your friend. Friendship, accordingly, is always helpful, but
love sometimes even does harm. Try to perfect yourself, if for no
other reason, in order that you may learn how to love.
Hasten, therefore, in order that, while thus perfecting yourself
for my benefit, you may not have learned perfection for the
benefit of another. To be sure, I am already deriving some profit
by imagining that we two shall be of one mind, and that whatever
portion of my strength has yielded to age will return to me from
your strength, although there is not so very much difference in
our ages.
But yet I wish to rejoice in the accomplished fact. We feel a
joy over those whom we love, even when separated from them,
but such a joy is light and fleeting; the sight of a man, and his
presence, and communion with him, afford something of living
pleasure; this is true, at any rate, if one not only sees the man
one desires, but the sort of man one desires. Give yourself to
me, therefore, as a gift of great price, and, that you may strive
the more, reflect that you yourself are mortal, and that I am old.
Hasten to find me, but hasten to find yourself first. Make
progress, and, before all else, endeavour to be consistent with
yourself. And when you would find out whether you have
accomplished anything, consider whether you desire the same
things today that you desired yesterday. A shifting of the will
indicates that the mind is at sea, heading in various directions,
according to the course of the wind. But that which is settled
and solid does not wander from its place. This is the blessed lot
of the completely wise man, and also, to a certain extent, of him
who is progressing and has made some headway. Now what is the
difference between these two classes of men? The one is in motion,
to be sure, but does not change its position; it merely tosses up
and down where it is; the other is not in motion at all. Farewell.

Footnotes

1. The question of Lucilius represents the popular view, which regards love
as including friendship. But according to Seneca it is only the perfect love,
from which all selfishness has been removed, that becomes identical with
friendship.
