BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 37

On Allegiance to Virtue

You have promised to be a good man; you have enlisted under
oath; that is the strongest chain which will hold you to a sound
understanding. Any man will be but mocking you, if he declares
that this is an effeminate and easy kind of soldiering. I will not
have you deceived. The word of this most honourable compact
are the same as the words of that most disgraceful one, to wit:[1]
“Through burning, imprisonment, or death by the sword.”
From the men who hire out their strength for the arena, who
eat and drink what they must pay for with their blood, security
is taken that they will endure such trials even though they be
unwilling; from you, that you will endure them willingly and with
alacrity. The gladiator may lower his weapon and test the pity of
the people;[2] but you will neither lower your weapon nor beg for
life. You must die erect and unyielding. Moreover, what profit is
it to gain a few days or a few years? There is no discharge for us
from the moment we are born.
“Then how can I free myself?” you ask. You cannot escape
necessities, but you can overcome them
By force a way is made.[3]
And this way will be afforded you by philosophy. Betake yourself
therefore to philosophy if you would be safe, untroubled, happy,
in fine, if you wish to be—and that is most important—free. There
is no other way to attain this end.
Folly[4] is low, abject, mean, slavish, and exposed to many of the
cruellest passions. These passions, which are heavy taskmasters,
sometimes ruling by turns, and sometimes together, can be
banished from you by wisdom, which is the only real freedom.
There is but one path leading thither, and it is a straight path; you
will not go astray. Proceed with steady step, and if you would have
all things under your control, put yourself under the control of
reason; if reason becomes your ruler, you will become ruler over
many. You will learn from her what you should undertake, and
how it should be done; you will not blunder into things.
You can show me no man who knows how he began to crave that
which he craves. He has not been led to that pass by forethought;
he has been driven to it by impulse. Fortune attacks us as often as
we attack Fortune. It is disgraceful, instead of proceeding ahead,
to be carried along, and then suddenly, amid the whirlpool of
events, to ask in a dazed way: “How did I get into this condition?”
Farewell.

Footnotes

1. He refers to the famous oath which the gladiator took when he hired
himself to the fighting-master; uri, vinciri, verberari, ferroque necari patior;
cf. Petronius, Sat. 117. The oath is abbreviated in the text, probably by
Seneca himself, who paraphrases it in Ep. lxxi. 23.
2. Awaiting the signal of “thumbs up” or “thumbs down.” Cf. Juvenal, iii. 36
verso pollice, vulgus Quem iubet occidunt populariter.
3. Vergil, Aeneid, ii. 494.
4. In the language of Stoicism, ἀμαθία, stultitia, “folly,” is the antithesis of
σοφία, sapientia, “wisdom.”
