BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 38

On Quiet Conversation

You are right when you urge that we increase our mutual traffic
in letters. But the greatest benefit is to be derived from conversa-
tion, because it creeps by degrees into the soul. Lectures prepared
beforehand and spouted in the presence of a throng have in them
more noise but less intimacy. Philosophy is good advice; and no
one can give advice at the top of his lungs. Of course we must
sometimes also make use of these harangues, if I may so call them,
when a doubting member needs to be spurred on; but when the
aim is to make a man learn and not merely to make him wish to
learn, we must have recourse to the low-toned words of conversa-
tion. They enter more easily, and stick in the memory; for we do
not need many words, but, rather, effective words.
Words should be scattered like seed; no matter how small the
seed may be, if it has once found favourable ground, it unfolds
its strength and from an insignificant thing spreads to its great-
est growth. Reason grows in the same way; it is not large to the
outward view, but increases as it does its work. Few words are
spoken; but if the mind has truly caught them, they come into
their strength and spring up. Yes, precepts and seeds have the
same quality; they produce much, and yet they are slight things.
Only, as I said, let a favourable mind receive and assimilate them.
Then of itself the mind also will produce bounteously in its turn,
giving back more than it has received. Farewell.


THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS

“Good”: An Essay by Jocko Willink
Source: Tools of Titans by Tim Ferriss

Background from Tim: Jocko Willink (FB/TW: @jockowillink;

jockopodcast.com) is one of the scariest human beings imagin-
able. He is a lean 230 pounds. He is a Brazilian jiu-jitsu black belt
who used to tap out 20 Navy SEALs per workout. He is a legend
in the special operations world, and his eyes look through you
more than at you. His interview with me was the first interview
he ever did, and it took the Internet by storm.
Jocko spent 20 years in the U.S. Navy and commanded SEAL
Team Three’s Task Unit Bruiser, the most highly decorated special
operations unit from the Iraq war. Upon returning to the United
States, Jocko served as the officer-in-charge of training for all West
Coast SEAL Teams, designing and implementing some of the
most challenging and realistic combat training in the world. After
retiring from the Navy, he co-founded Echelon Front, a leader-
ship and management consulting company, and co-authored the
#1 New York Times bestseller Extreme Ownership: How U.S. Navy
SEALs Lead and Win.

He now discusses war, leadership, business and life in his top-
rated podcast, Jocko Podcast. He is an avid surfer, a husband, and
the father of four “highly motivated” children.

ENTER JOCKO
How do I deal with setbacks, failures, delays, defeat, or other
disasters? I actually have a fairly simple way of dealing with these
situations. There is one word to deal with all those situations, and
that is: “good.”
This is something that one of my direct subordinates, one of
the guys who worked for me, a guy who became one of my best
friends, pointed out. He would call me up or pull me aside with
some major problem or some issue that was going on, and he’d
say, “Boss, we got this, that, or the other thing going wrong,” and
I would look at him and I’d say, “Good.”
And finally, one day, he was telling me about some situation
that was going off the rails, and as soon as he got done explaining
it to me, he said, “I already know what you’re going to say.”
And I asked, “What am I going to say?”
He said, “You’re going to say: ‘Good.’”
He continued, “That’s what you always say. When something is
wrong or going bad, you just look at me and say, ‘Good.’”
And I said, “Well, I mean it. Because that is how I operate.” So
I explained to him that when things are going bad, there’s going
to be some good that will come from it.
➞ Oh, mission got cancelled? Good. We can focus on
another one.
➞ Didn’t get the new high-speed gear we wanted? Good. We
can keep it simple.
➞ Didn’t get promoted? Good. More time to get better.
➞ Didn’t get funded? Good. We own more of the company.
➞ Didn’t get the job you wanted? Good. Go out, gain more
experience, and build a better résumé.
➞ Got injured? Good. Needed a break from training.
➞ Got tapped out? Good. It’s better to tap out in training
than to tap out on the street.
➞ Got beat? Good. We learned.
➞ Unexpected problems? Good. We have the opportunity to
figure out a solution.
That’s it. When things are going bad, don’t get all bummed out,
don’t get startled, don’t get frustrated. No. Just look at the issue
and say: “Good.”
Now. I don’t mean to say something clichéd. I’m not trying to
sound like Mr. Smiley Positive Guy. That guy ignores the hard
truth. That guy thinks a positive attitude will solve problems.
It won’t. But neither will dwelling on the problem. No. Accept
reality, but focus on the solution. Take that issue, take that set-
back, take that problem, and turn it into something good. Go
forward. And, if you are part of a team, that attitude will spread
throughout.
Finally, to close this up: If you can say the word “good,” guess
what? It means you’re still alive. It means you’re still breathing.
And if you’re still breathing, that means you’ve still got some
fight left in you. So get up, dust off, reload, recalibrate, re-engage,
and go out on the attack.
And that, right there, is about as good as it gets.
