BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 39

On Noble Aspirations

I shall indeed arrange for you, in careful order and narrow com-
pass, the notes which you request. But consider whether you may
not get more help from the customary method[1] than from that
which is now commonly called a “breviary,” though in the good
old days, when real Latin was spoken, it was called a “summary.”[2]
The former is more necessary to one who is learning a subject, the
latter to one who knows it. For the one teaches, the other stirs the
memory. But I shall give you abundant opportunity for both.[3] A
man like you should not ask me for this authority or that; he who
furnishes a voucher for his statements argues himself unknown.
I shall therefore write exactly what you wish, but I shall do it
in my own way; until then, you have many authors whose works
will presumably keep your ideas sufficiently in order. Pick up the
list of the philosophers; that very act will compel you to wake up,
when you see how many men have been working for your benefit.
You will desire eagerly to be one of them yourself, for this is the
most excellent quality that the noble soul has within itself, that it
can be roused to honourable things.
No man of exalted gifts is pleased with that which is low and
mean; the vision of great achievement summons him and uplifts
him.
Just as the flame springs straight into the air and cannot be
cabined or kept down any more than it can repose in quiet, so our
soul is always in motion, and the more ardent it is, the greater its
motion and activity. But happy is the man who has given it this
impulse toward better things! He will place himself beyond the
jurisdiction of chance; he will wisely control prosperity; he will
lessen adversity, and will despise what others hold in admiration.
It is the quality of a great soul to scorn great things and to
prefer that which is ordinary rather than that which is too great.
For the one condition is useful and life-giving; but the other does
harm just because it is excessive. Similarly, too rich a soil makes
the grain fall flat, branches break down under too heavy a load,
excessive productiveness does not bring fruit to ripeness. This
is the case with the soul also; for it is ruined by uncontrolled
prosperity, which is used not only to the detriment of others, but
also to the detriment of itself.
What enemy was ever so insolent to any opponent as are their
pleasures to certain men? The only excuse that we can allow for
the incontinence and mad lust of these men is the fact that they
suffer the evils which they have inflicted upon others. And they
are rightly harassed by this madness, because desire must have
unbounded space for its excursions, if it transgresses nature’s
mean. For this has its bounds, but waywardness and the acts that
spring from wilful lust are without boundaries.
Utility measures our needs; but by what standard can you check
the superfluous? It is for this reason that men sink themselves
in pleasures, and they cannot do without them when once they
have become accustomed to them, and for this reason they are
most wretched, because they have reached such a pass that what
was once superfluous to them has become indispensable. And
so they are the slaves of their pleasures instead of enjoying them;
they even love their own ills,[4]—and that is the worst ill of all!
Then it is that the height of unhappiness is reached, when men
are not only attracted, but even pleased, by shameful things, and
when there is no longer any room for a cure, now that those things
which once were vices have become habits. Farewell.

Footnotes

1. The regular method of studying philosophy was, as we infer from this
letter, a course of reading in the philosophers. Seneca deprecates the use of
the “cram” which is only a memory-help, as a substitute for reading, on the
ground that by its use one does not, in the first place, learn the subject, and,
in the second place and chiefly, that one loses the inspiration to be derived
by direct contact with great thinkers. The request of Lucilius for a cram
thus suggests the main topic of the letter, which is taken up in the second
paragraph.
2. i.e., the word breviarium, “abridgment,” “abstract,” has displaced the better
word summarium, “outline of chief points.”
3. i.e., to do the reading and to review it by means of the summary. The
reading will enable Lucilius to identify for himself the authors of the several
passages or doctrines.
4. i.e., their pleasures. These ills, by being cultivated, become vices.
