BOOK: Letters from a Stoic by Seneca

LETTER 43

On the Relativity of Fame

Do you ask how the news reached me, and who informed me,
that you were entertaining this idea, of which you had said noth-
ing to a single soul? It was that most knowing of persons—gossip.

“What,” you say, “am I such a great personage that I can stir up
gossip?” Now there is no reason why you should measure yourself
according to this part of the world;[1] have regard only to the place
where you are dwelling.
Any point which rises above adjacent points is great, at the spot
where it rises. For greatness is not absolute; comparison increases
it or lessens it. A ship which looms large in the river seems tiny
when on the ocean. A rudder which is large for one vessel, is
small for another.
So you in your province[2] are really of importance, though
you scorn yourself. Men are asking what you do, how you dine,
and how you sleep, and they find out, too; hence there is all the
more reason for your living circumspectly. Do not, however, deem
yourself truly happy until you find that you can live before men’s
eyes, until your walls protect but do not hide you; although we
are apt to believe that these walls surround us, not to enable us
to live more safely, but that we may sin more secretly.
I shall mention a fact by which you may weigh the worth of a
man’s character: you will scarcely find anyone who can live with
his door wide open. It is our conscience, not our pride, that has
put doorkeepers at our doors; we live in such a fashion that being
suddenly disclosed to view is equivalent to being caught in the
act. What profits it, however, to hide ourselves away, and to avoid
the eyes and ears of men?
A good conscience welcomes the crowd, but a bad conscience,
even in solitude, is disturbed and troubled. If your deeds are
honourable, let everybody know them; if base, what matters it
that no one knows them, as long as you yourself know them?
How wretched you are if you despise such a witness! Farewell.

Footnotes

1. i.e., Rome.
2. Lucilius was at this time the imperial procurator in Sicily.
