BOOK: Zorba the Greek by Nikos Kazantzakis

CHAPTER XII 

Sleep overcame me, and when I awoke Zorba had gone. It was cold and I did not have 
the slightest desire to rise. I reached up to some book-shelves above my head and 
took down a book which I had brought with me and of which I was fond: the poems of 
Mallarme. I read slowly and at random. I closed the book, opened it again, and finally 
threw it down. For the first time in my life it all seemed bloodless, odourless, void of 
any human substance. Pale-blue, hollow words in a vacuum. Perfectly clear distilled 
water without any bacteria, but also without any nutritive substances. Without life. 
In religions which have lost their creative spark, the gods eventually become no more 
than poetic motifs or ornaments for decorating human solitude and walls. Something 
similar had happened to this poetry. The ardent aspirations of the heart, laden with 
earth and seed, had become a flawless intellectual game, a clever, aerial and intricate 
architecture. 

I reopened the book and began reading again. Why had these poems gripped me for 
so many years? Pure poetry! Life had turned into a lucid, transparent game, 
unencumbered by even a single drop of blood. The human element is brutish, 
uncouth, impure - it is composed of love, the flesh and a cry of distress. Let it be 
sublimated into an abstract idea, and, in the crucible of the spirit, by various processes 
of alchemy, let it be rarefied and evaporate. 
All these things which had formerly so fascinated me 
145 

appeared this morning to be no more than cerebral acrobatics and refined 
charlatanism! That is how it always is at the decline of a civilisation. That is how man's 
anguish ends - in masterly conjuring tricks: pure poetry, pure music, pure thought. The 
last man - who has freed himself from all belief, from all illusions and has nothing more 
to expect or to fear - sees the clay of which he is made reduced to spirit, and this spirit 
has no soil left for its roots, from which to draw its sap. The last man has emptied 
himself; no more seed, no more excrement, no more blood. Everything having turned 
into words, every set of words into musical jugglery, the last man goes even further: 
he sits in his utter solitude and decomposes the music into mute mathematical 
equations. 

I started. 'Buddha is that last man!' I cried. That is his secret and terrible significance. 
Buddha is the 'pure' soul which has emptied itself; in him is the void, he is the Void. 
'Empty your body, empty your spirit, empty your heart!' he cries. Wherever he sets his 
foot, water no longer flows, no grass can grow, no child be born. 
I must mobilise words and their necromantic power, I thought, invoke magic rhythms; 
lay siege to him, cast a spell over him and drive him out of my entrails! I must throw 
over him the net of images, catch him and free myself! 

Writing Buddha was, in fact, ceasing to be a literary exercise. It was a life-and-death 
struggle against a tremendous force of destruction lurking within me, a duel with the 
great NO which was consuming my heart, and on the result of this duel depended the 
salvation of my soul. 

With briskness and determination I seized the manuscript. I had discovered my goal, I 
knew now where to strike! Buddha was the last man. We are only at the beginning; we 
have neither eaten, drunk, nor loved enough; we have not yet lived. This delicate old 
man, scant of breath, has come to us too soon. We must oust him as quickly as 
possible! 

So I spoke to myself and I began to write. But no, this was 
146 

not writing: it was a real war, a merciless hunt, a siege, a spell to bring the monster 



out of its hiding-place. Art is, in fact, a magic incantation. Obscure homicidal forces 
lurk in our entrails, deadly impulses to kill, destroy, hate, dishonour. Then art appears 
with its sweet piping and delivers us. 

I wrote, pursued, struggled the whole day through. In the evening I was exhausted. 
But I felt I had made progress, had mastered a few advance-posts of the enemy. I 
was now anxious for Zorba to return, so that I could eat, sleep and build up my 
strength to resume the fight at dawn. 

It was already dark when Zorba came in. He had a radiant expression on his face. He 

has found the answer to something, too, I thought. And I waited. 

I had begun to grow impatient with him and, only a few days before, I had said angrily: 

'Zorba, our funds are getting low. Whatever has to be done, do it quickly! Let's get this 

railway going; if we're not successful with the coal, let's go all out for the timber. 

Otherwise we've had it!' 

Zorba had scratched his head. 

'Funds getting low, are they, boss? That's bad!' he said. 

"They're gone, Zorba. We've swallowed up the lot. Do something! How are your 
experiments going? No luck yet?' 

Zorba had hung his head and made no reply. He had felt ashamed that evening. "That 
damned slope!' he said furiously. Til get the better of it yet!' And now he had come in, 
his face lit up with success. 

I've done it, boss!' he shouted. T've found the right angle! It was slipping through my 
hands, trying to get away from me, but I held on and pinned it down, boss!' 
'Well, hurry up and get the thing working! Fire away, Zorba! What else do you need?' 
'Early tomorrow morning I must go to town and buy the tackle: a thick steel cable, 
pulleys, bearings, nails, hooks.... Don't worry, I'll be back almost before you've seen 
me go!' 

He lit the fire shortly afterwards, prepared our meal and 
147 

we ate and drank with excellent appetites. We had both worked well that day. 

The next morning I went with Zorba as far as the village. We talked like serious and 

practical-minded people about the working of the lignite. While going down a slope, 

Zorba kicked against a stone, which went rolling downhill. He stopped for a moment in 

amazement, as if he were seeing this astounding spectacle for the first time in his life. 

He looked round at me, and in his look I discerned faint consternation. 

'Boss, did you see that?' he said at last. 'On slopes, stones come to life again.' 

I said nothing, but I felt a deep joy. This, I thought, is how great visionaries and poets 

see everything - as if for the first time. Each morning they see a new world before their 

eyes; they do not really see it, they create it. 

The universe for Zorba, as for the first men on earth, was a weighty, intense vision; 
the stars glided over him, the sea broke against his temples. He lived the earth, the 
water, the animals and God, without the distorting intervention of reason. 
Dame Hortense had been informed and she was waiting for us on her doorstep. She 
was painted, caulked with powder, and uneasy. She had got herself up like a fun-fair 
on a Saturday night. The mule was in front of her gate; Zorba jumped on its back and 
seized the reins. 

The old siren came up timidly and placed her plump little hand on the animal's breast, 
as if she wanted to prevent her beloved from leaving. 
'Zorba ...' she cooed, raising herself on tiptoe. Zorba....' 

Zorba turned his head away. He hated having to listen to lovers' nonsense like this in 
the middle of the road. The poor woman saw his look and was terrified. But her hand 
still pressed on the mule's breast, full of tender entreaty. 
'What do you want?' Zorba asked angrily. 
148 

'Zorba,' she pleaded, 'be good.... Don't forget me, Zorba. ... Be good ...' 



Zorba shook the reins without replying. The mule started off. 

'Good luck, Zorba!' I cried. "Three days, do you hear? No more!' 

He turned round, waving his big hand. The old siren was weeping and her tears 

washed furrows in the powder on her face. 

'I gave you my word, boss!' Zorba shouted. 'Goodbye!' 

And he disappeared beneath the olive trees. Dame Hortense went on crying, but she 
kept her eyes on the splash of colour made by the gay red rug which she had placed 
so carefully for her beloved so that he should be comfortably seated. It was constantly 
being hidden by the silver foliage of the trees. Soon even that had disappeared. Dame 
Hortense looked round her. The world was empty. 

I did not go back to the beach. I felt sad and walked towards the mountains. As I 
reached the mountain track, I heard a trumpet sound. The country postman was 
announcing his arrival in the village. 
'Master!' he called to me, waving his hand. 

He came over and gave me a packet of newspapers, some literary reviews and two 
letters: one I immediately put away in my pocket to read in the evening, when day is 
done and the spirit is calm. I knew who had written it and I wanted to defer my joy so 
that it should last longer. 

The other letter I recognised from its sharp, jerky writing and the exotic stamps: it 
came from one of my old fellow-students, Karayannis. It was from a wild African 
mountainside, near Tanganyika. 

He was a strange, impulsive, dark man with very white teeth. One of his canines stuck 
out like a wild boar's. He never talked, he shouted. He never discussed, he quarrelled. 
He had left his own country, Crete, where he had been a 
149 

young theology teacher and a monk. He had flirted with one of his students, and they 
had been surprised one day kissing out in the fields. They had been booed. The same 
day the young teacher threw off the cowl and took a boat. He went to an uncle in 
Africa and started to work with a will. He opened a rope factory and made a lot of 
money. From time to time he wrote to me and invited me to go and stay with him for 
six months. Whenever I opened one of his letters, even before I read it, I could feel, 
arising from the crowded pages, which were always sewn together with string, a 
violent breath which made my hair stand on end. I was always deciding I would go 
and see him in Africa, but never went. 

I left the track, sat on a stone, opened and began reading this letter: 
'When are you going to make up your mind to come here to me, you damned limpet 
clamped to the rocks of Greece? You, too, have turned into a typical lousy Greek, a 
tavern-loafer, a wallower in cafe-life. Because you need not think only cafes are cafes; 
books are, too, and habits, and your precious ideologies. They are all cafes. It is 
Sunday today and I have nothing to do: I am on my estate and I'm thinking of you. The 
sun is like a furnace, and there has not been a drop of rain. Here, when the rain does 
fall, in April, May and June, it's an absolute deluge. 

T'm all alone, and I like that. There are quite a lot of lousy Greeks here (Is there 
anywhere this vermin doesn't get to?) but I don't want to mix with them. They disgust 
me. Even here, you damned tavern-loafers - may the Devil take you -you've sent us 
your leprosy, your miserable back-biting. That's what is ruining Greece - politics! 
There's card-playing, too, of course, and ignorance, and the sins of the flesh. 
'I detest Europeans; that's why I am wandering about here in the mountains of 
Usumbara. I hate Europeans, but most of all I hate the lousy Greeks and everything 
Greek. I'll never set foot in Greece again. This is where I'll finish up. I've had 
my tomb made already, in front of my hut, here on the wild mountainside. I've even put 
up the stone and myself carved these words in large capitals: 
HERE LIES A GREEK WHO HATES THE GREEKS. 

'I burst out laughing, spit, swear and weep whenever I think of Greece. So as to see 



no Greeks and nothing Greek, I left the country for ever. I came here, brought my 
destiny with me - it was not my destiny which brought me: man does what he 
chooses! -1 brought my destiny here and I've worked and still am working like a slave. 
I've been sweating and will continue to sweat by the bucketful. I am fighting with the 
earth, the wind, the rain, and with the workmen, my red and black slaves. 
1 have no pleasures. Yes, one: work. Physical and mental, but preferably physical. I 
like to exhaust myself, sweat, hear my bones crack. Half my money I throw away, 
waste it however and wherever I feel inclined. I'm not a slave to money: money is my 
slave. I am a slave to work, and I'm proud of it. I fell trees; I have a contract with the 
British. I make rope; and now I've started planting cotton, too. Last night, among my 
negroes, two tribes - the Wa'yao and the Wa'ngoni - began fighting over a woman - 
over a whore. Just hurt pride, you know. Just the same as in Greece. Insults, brawls, 
and then out come the clubs. They broke one another's heads over her. The women 
ran to fetch me in the middle of the night, and woke me with their yapping, to go and 
arbitrate. I was angry, told them all to go to the devil, then to the British police. But 
they stayed there howling in front of my door the whole night. At dawn I went out and 
arbitrated. 

Tomorrow, early, I am going to scale the Usumbara mountains, with their dense 
forest, fresh waters and everlasting greenness. Well, you lousy Babylonian Greek, 
when will you cut adrift from Europe? ... "that great whore that sitteth upon many 
waters, with whom the kings of the earth have 
150 

committed fornication...!" When will you come, so that we can climb these pure and 
wild mountains together? 

'I have a child by a black woman: a girl. I've sent her mother away: she cuckolded me 
in public in the full glare of the midday sun, under every green tree in the neighbour- 
hood. I had enough of her, and threw her out. But I kept the girl; she's two. She can 
walk, and she's beginning to talk. I'm teaching her Greek; the first sentence I taught 
her was: "I spit on you, you lousy Greeks, I spit on you, you lousy Greeks!" 
'She looks like me, the little scamp; she's only got her mother's broad flat nose. I love 
her, but just as you love a dog or a cat. Come out here and get a boy by a Usumbara 
woman. We'll marry the two of them one day, just to amuse ourselves, and to amuse 
them, too! 

'Goodbye! May the devil go with you, and with me, dear friend! 
'Karayannis, Servus diabolicus Dei.' 

I left the letter open on my knees. An ardent desire to go took possession of me once 
more. Not because I wanted to leave - 1 was quite all right on this Cretan coast, and 
felt happy and free there and I needed nothing - but because I have always been 
consumed with one desire; to touch and see as much as possible of the earth and the 
sea before I die. 

I stood up, changed my mind, and instead of climbing the hill went hurriedly towards 

the beach. I felt the other letter in the upper pocket of my coat, and could not wait any 

more. That sweet, unbearable foretaste of joy had lasted long enough. 

I reached the hut, lit the fire, made some tea, ate some bread and honey and oranges. 

I undressed, stretched out on my bed and opened the letter: 

'Master and neophyte - Greetings! 

'I have a tremendous and difficult job here, thank "God" -I enclose the dangerous word 

in inverted commas (like a 

152 

wild beast behind bars) so that you do not get excited as soon as you open my letter. 
Well, a very difficult job, "God" be praised! Haifa million Greeks are in danger in the 
south of Russia and the Caucasus. Many of them speak only Turkish or Russian, but 
their hearts speak Greek fanatically. They are of our race. Just to look at them - the 
way their eyes flash, rapacious, ferrety, the cunning and sensuality of their lips when 



they smile, the way they have managed to become bosses and have moujiks working 
for them in this immense territory of Russia - it's quite enough to convince you that 
they are descendants of your beloved Odysseus. So one comes to love them and 
cannot let them perish. 

Tor they are in danger of perishing. They have lost all they had, are hungry and 
naked. From one side they are harried by the Bolsheviks; from the other by the Kurds. 
Refugees have swarmed in from every direction to settle in one town or another in 
Georgia and Armenia. There's no food, medicine, or clothing. They gather in the ports, 
scan the horizon anxiously for Greek ships coming to take them back to their Mother - 
Greece. One part of our race - that means, one part of our soul - is panic-stricken. 
'If we leave them to their fate, they will perish. We need a lot of love and 
understanding, enthusiasm and practical sense - those qualities which you like so 
much to see united - if we are going to save them and get them back to the part of our 
own free land where they will be of most use - that is, on the frontiers of Macedonia, 
and, further afield, on the frontiers of Thrace. That is the only way we shall save hun- 
dreds of thousands of Greeks, and save ourselves with them. For as soon as I arrived 
here I drew a circle, in the way you taught me, and called that circle "my duty". I said: 
"If I save this entire circle, I am saved; if I do not save it, I am lost!" Well, inside that 
circle there are five hundred thousand Greeks! 

'I go to towns and villages, collect all the Greeks together, write reports, send 

telegrams, try to make our officials in 

153 

Athens send boats, food, clothes, and medicine, and transport these poor creatures to 
Greece. If to struggle with zeal and obstinacy is to be happy, then I am happy. I do not 
know whether I have cut my happiness to my stature, to use your phrase. Please 
heaven I have, because then I would be a great person. I would like to increase my 
stature to what I think would make me happy; that is, to the farthest frontiers of 
Greece! But that's enough theory! You are lying on your Cretan beach, listening to the 
sound of the sea and the santuri -you have time, I have not. I am swallowed up by 
activity and I am glad of it. Action, dear inactive master, action; there is no other 
salvation. 

"The subject of my meditations is, in fact, very simple and all of a piece. I say: These 
inhabitants of the Pontus and the Caucasus, peasants of Kars, big and small 
merchants of Tif-lis, Batum, Novo Rossisk, Rostov, Odessa and the Crimea, are ours, 
they are of our blood; for them, as for us, the capital of Greece is Constantinople. We 
all have the same chief. You call him Odysseus, others Constantinos Palaeologos* - 
not the one who was killed beneath the walls of Byzantium, but the other, the 
legendary one, who was changed into marble and still stands erect waiting for the 
Angel of Liberty. With your permission, I call this chief of our race Acritas.t I like that 
name better; it is more austere and warlike. As soon as you hear it, there rises within 
you the image of the eternal Hellene, fully armed, fighting without cease or respite on 
the boundaries and frontiers. On every frontier: national, intellectual, and spiritual. And 
if you add Digenes A :, you describe even more completely that marvellous synthesis of 
East and West which is our race. 

'I am in Kars now; I came to assemble all the Greeks of the neighbouring villages. On 
the day of my arrival the Kurds 

* The last of the East Roman Emperors (1448-53). t, J Basilius Digenes Acritas; tenth- 
century Byzantine hero. Digenes: of double birth (Moslem father and Christian 
mother). Acritas: frontier-guard of the Empire. 

had seized a Greek teacher and priest in the district and nailed horse-shoes to their 
feet. The notables were horrified and took refuge in the house where I am staying. We 
can hear the Kurds' guns coming closer all the time. All these Greeks have their eyes 
fixed on me, as if I were the only one with the strength to save them. 



'I was counting on leaving tomorrow for Tiflis, but now, in the face of this danger, I am 
ashamed to leave. So I am staying. I don't say I am not afraid; I am afraid, but I'm 
ashamed. Wouldn't Rembrandt's Warrior, my Warrior, have done the same thing? He 
would have stayed; so I am staying too. If the Kurds come into the town it is only 
natural and just that I should be the first to be shoed. I am sure, master, you never 
thought your pupil would end like this! 

'After one of those interminable Greek discussions we decided that everyone should 
assemble this evening with mules, horses, cattle, women and children, and at dawn 
we will all start out together for the north. I shall walk in front, the ram guiding the flock. 
'A patriarchal emigration of a people over chains of mountains and plains with 
legendary names! And I shall be a sort of Moses - an imitation Moses - leading the 
chosen race to the Promised Land; as these naive people are calling Greece. Of 
course, to be really worthy of this Mosaic mission and not disgrace you, I should have 
done away with my elegant leggings which you tease me about and wrapped my legs 
in sheep-skin. I should also have a long, greasy, wavy beard, and, above all, a large 
pair of horns. But I'm sorry, I can't give you that pleasure. It's easier to get me to 
change my soul than my costume. I wear leggings; I am as smooth-shaven as a 
cabbage stump; and I'm not married. 

'Master, I hope you get this letter, for it may be the last. No one can say. I have no 
confidence in the secret forces which are said to protect men. I believe in the blind 
forces which hit out right and left, without malice, without purpose, killing whoever 
happens to be in their way. If I leave this earth 

154 
155 

(I say "leave" so as not to frighten you or myself with the proper word), if I leave this 

earth, I say, I hope you keep well and happy, dear master! I am embarrassed at 

having to say it, but I must, so please excuse me: I, too, have loved you very dearly.' 

Then underneath, written hurriedly in pencil, was this post-scriptum: 

'PS. I haven't forgotten the agreement we made on the boat the day I left. If I have to 

"leave" this earth, I shall warn you, remember, wherever you are; don't let it scare 

you.' 
