II 

The sea, autumn mildness, islands bathed in light, fine rain spreading a diaphanous 
veil over the immortal nakedness of Greece. Happy is the man, I thought, who, before 
dying, has the good fortune to sail the Aegean Sea. 

Many are the joys of this world - women, fruit, ideas. But to cleave that sea in the 
gentle autumnal season, murmuring the name of each islet, is to my mind the joy most 
apt to transport the heart of man into paradise. Nowhere else can one pass so easily 
and serenely from reality to dream. The frontiers dwindle, and from the masts of the 
most ancient ships spring branches and fruits. It is as if here in Greece necessity is 
the mother of miracles. 

Towards noon the rain stopped. The sun parted the clouds and appeared gentle, 
tender, washed and fresh, and it caressed with its rays the beloved waters and lands. 
I stood at the prow and let myself be intoxicated with the miracle which was revealed 
as far as the eye could see. 

On the ship were Greeks, cunning devils with rapacious eyes, brains like the trumpery 
goods of bazaar-dealers, wirepulling and quarrelling; an untuned piano; honest and 
venomous shrews. One's first impulse was to seize the ship by both ends, plunge it 
into the sea, shake it thoroughly to make all the livestock which polluted it drop off - 
men, rats, bugs -and then refloat it, freshly washed and empty. 
But at times I was seized with compassion. A Buddhist compassion, as cold as the 
conclusion of a metaphysical syllogism. A compassion not only for men but for all life 
which struggles, cries, weeps, hopes and does not perceive that everything is a 
phantasmagoria of nothingness. Compassion for the Greeks, and for the lignite mine, 
and for my unfinished manuscript of Buddha, for all those vain compositions of light 
and shade which suddenly disturb and contaminate the pure air. 
I looked at Zorba's drawn and waxen face. He was sitting on a coil of ropes in the 
bows. He was sniffing at a lemon and listening with his great ears to some passengers 
quarrelling about the king and others about Venizelos. He was shaking his head and 
spitting. 

'Old junk!' he murmured disdainfully. 'Aren't they ashamed of themselves!' 
'What do you mean by old junk, Zorba?' 

'Why, all these - kings, democracies, plebiscites, deputies, fiddle-faddle!' 
Zorba had got so far beyond contemporary events that they had already ceased to be 
anything but out-of-date rubbish. Certainly, to him telegraphy, steam-ships and 
engines, current morality and religion must have appeared like rusty old rifles. His 
mind progressed much faster than the world. 

The ropes were creaking on the masts, the coastlines were dancing, and the women 
on board had become yellower than a lemon. They had laid down their weapons - 
paint, bodices, hairpins, combs. Their lips had paled, their nails were turning blue. The 
old magpie scolds were losing their borrowed plumes - ribbons, false eyebrows and 
beauty-spots, brassieres - and to see them on the point of vomiting, you felt disgust 
and a great compassion. 

Zorba was also turning yellow and green. His sparkling eyes were dulled. It was only 
towards the evening that his eyes brightened again. He pointed out two dolphins, 
leaping through the water alongside the ship. 
'Dolphins!' he exclaimed joyously. 

I noticed for the first time that almost half of the index finger on his left hand was 

missing. I started and felt sick. 

'What happened to your finger, Zorba?' I cried. 

'Nothing/ he replied, offended that I had not shown more delight in the dolphins. 



'Did you get it caught in a machine?' I insisted. 

'What ever are you going on about machines for? I cut it off myself.' 

'Yourself? Why?' 

'You can't understand, boss!' he said, shrugging his shoulders. 

'I told you I had been in every trade. Once I was a potter. I was mad about that craft. 

D'you realise what it means to take a lump of mud and make what you will out of it? 

Ffrr! You turn the wheel and the mud whirls round, as if it were possessed while you 

stand over it and say: I'm going to make a jug, I'm going to make a plate, I'm going to 

make a lamp and the devil knows what more! That's what you might call being a man: 

freedom!' 

He had forgotten the sea, he was no longer biting the lemon, his eyes had become 
clear again. 

'Well?' I asked. 'What about your finger?' 

'Oh, it got in my way in the wheel. It always got plumb in the middle of things and 
upset my plans. So one day I seized a hatchet...' 
'Didn't it hurt you?' 

'What d'you mean? I'm not a tree-trunk, I'm a man. Of course it hurt me. But it got in 
my way at the wheel, so I cut it off.' 

The sun went down and the sea became calmer. The clouds dispersed. The evening 
star shone, I looked at the sea, I looked at the sky and began to reflect... To love like 
that, to take the hatchet and chop and feel the pain ... But I hid my emotion. 
'Abad system that, Zorba!' I said, smiling. 'It reminds me of the ascetic who, according 
to the Golden Legend, once saw a woman who disturbed him physically, so he took 
an axe 

'The devil he didn't!' Zorba interposed, guessing what I was going to say. 'Cut that off! 
To hell with the fool! The poor benighted innocent, that's never an obstacle!' 
'But,' I insisted, 'it can be a very great obstacle!' 
To what?' 

To your entry into the kingdom of heaven.' 

Zorba glanced sideways at me, with a mocking air, and said: 

'But, you fool, that is the key to paradise!' 

He raised his head, looked at me closely, as if he wanted to see what was going on in 

my mind: future lives, the kingdom of heaven, women, priests. But he did not seem to 

be able to gather much. He shook his great grey head guardedly. 

"The maimed don't get into paradise/ he said, and then fell silent. 

I went to lie down in my cabin and took a book. Buddha was still engaging my 

thoughts. I read The Dialogue of Buddha and the Shepherd which had filled my mind 

for some years with peace and security. 

the shepherd: My meal is ready, I have milked my ewes. The door of my hut is bolted, 
my fire is alight. And you, sky, can rain as much as you please! 
buddha: I no longer need food or milk. The winds are my shelter, my fire is out. And 
you, sky, can rain as much as you please! 

the shepherd: / have oxen, I have cows, I have my father's meadows and a bull who 
covers my cows. And you, sky, can rain as much as you please! 
buddha: / have neither oxen, nor cows, I have no meadows. I have nothing, I fear 
nothing. And you, sky, can rain as much as you please! 

the shepherd: 1 have a docile and faithful shepherdess. For years she has been my 
wife; I am happy when I play with her at night. And you, sky, you can rain as much as 
you please! 

buddha: I have a free and docile soul. For years I have trained it and 1 have taught it 
to play with me. And you, sky, can rain as much as you please! 
These two voices were still speaking when sleep overcame 

me. The wind had risen again and the waves were breaking over the thick glass of the 
porthole. I was floating like a wisp of smoke between sleeping and waking. A violent 



storm broke, the meadows disappeared under the waters, the bullocks, the cows and 
the bull were swallowed up. The wind carried away the roof of the hut, the fire was 
quenched, the woman uttered a cry and fell dead in the mud, and the shepherd began 
his lamentations. I could not hear what he said, but he was crying aloud and I was 
sinking deeper into a slumber, slipping like a fish down through the watery depths. 
At daybreak I awoke, and there, to our right, lay the proud, wild and lordly island. The 
pale-pink mountains were smiling through the mists beneath the autumnal sun. Round 
our ship, the indigo-blue sea was still seething restlessly. 

Zorba, wrapped in a brown rug, was gazing eagerly at Crete. His eyes turned rapidly 
from mountain to plain, followed the shore, exploring it as if all the coast and land were 
familiar to him, and that he were delighted to wander there again in his mind. 
I went to him, touched him on the shoulder and said: 

'Zorba, it's certainly not the first time you've come to Crete! You're gazing at it like an 
old friend.' 

Zorba yawned, as if bored. I felt he was not at all inclined to start a conversation. 

I smiled. Talking bores you, doesn't it, Zorba?' 

'It's not exactly that, boss,' he replied. 'Only taking's difficult.' 

'Difficult? Why?' 

He did not reply at once. His eyes roamed again slowly over the shore. He had slept 
on deck, and his curly grey hair was dripping with dew. The rising sun shone right into 
the deep furrows lining his cheeks, his chin and his neck. 
Finally he moved his lips. They were thick and drooping, like those of a goat. 

20 
21 

'In the morning I find it difficult to open my mouth. Very difficult. I'm sorry/ 

He lapsed again into silence, and once more his small round eyes were fixed on 

Crete. 

A bell rang for breakfast. Greenish-yellow, screwed-up faces began to emerge from 
the cabins. Women, with their coils of hair coming loose, reeled as they dragged 
themselves from table to table. They smelled of vomit and eau-de-Cologne, and their 
eyes were cloudy, terrified and stupid. 

Zorba, sitting in front of me, sniffed his coffee in a sensual way which was quite 
oriental. He spread butter and honey on his bread and ate it. His face gradually 
became brighter and calmer, the lines of his mouth softer. I secretly watched him as 
he slowly emerged from his wrapping of sleep, and saw how his eyes shone more and 
more brightly. 

He lit a cigarette, inhaled with pleasure and blew the blue smoke out of his hairy 
nostrils. He folded his right leg under him and made himself comfortable in eastern 
fashion. It was now possible for him to speak. 

'Is this the first time I've been to Crete?' he began. (He half-closed his eyes and 
looked through the porthole at Mount Ida, which was disappearing in the distance 
behind us.) 'No, it's not the first time. In 1896 I was already a fully-grown man. My 
moustache and my hair were their real colour, black as a raven. I had all my thirty-two 
teeth, and when I got drunk I swallowed the hors-d'oeuvres first and then the dish. 
Yes, I enjoyed myself no end. But suddenly the devil took a hand in things. A new 
revolution broke out in Crete. 

'In those days I was a pedlar. I peddled haberdashery from village to village in 
Macedonia, and instead of money I used to take cheese, wool, butter, rabbits and 
corn. Then I sold all that and made a double profit. In every village I came to at dark I 
knew where to spend the night. In every village there's always a tender-hearted 
widow, God bless her! I'd give her a reel of thread, or a comb, or a scarf - a black one, 
of 
22 



course, on account of the late-lamented - and I slept with her. It didn't cost me much! 

'No, it didn't cost me much, boss, the good time I had! But, as I said before, the devil 

got mixed up in things and Crete took up arms again. "Ah, to hell with her destiny!" I'd 

say. "Can't that damned Crete ever leave us in peace?" I put aside my cottons and 

combs, took my gun and set off to join the rebels in Crete.' 

Zorba became silent. We were now following the curve of a quiet sandy bay. The 

waves spread out here gently without breaking and only leaving a thin line of foam 

along the shore. The clouds had broken up, the sun was shining, and the rugged 

contours of Crete became serene. 

Zorba turned round and gave me a mocking look. 

'And now I suppose, boss, you think I'm going to start and tell you how many Turks' 
heads I've lopped off, and how many of their ears I've pickled in spirits - that's the 
custom in Crete. Well, I shan't! I don't like to, I'm ashamed. What sort of madness 
comes over us? ... Today I'm a bit more level-headed, and I ask myself: What sort of 
madness comes over us to make us throw ourselves on another man, when he's done 
nothing to us, and bite him, cut his nose off, tear his ear out, run him through the guts 
- and all the time, calling on the Almighty to help us! Does it mean we want the 
Almighty to go and cut off noses and ears and rip people up? 
'But at the rime, you see, my blood was hot in my veins! How could I stop to examine 
the whys and wherefores? To think things out properly and fairly, a fellow's got to be 
calm and old and toothless. When you're an old gaffer with no teeth, it's easy to say: 
"Damn it, boys, you mustn't bite!" But, when you've got all thirty-two teeth ... A man's a 
savage beast when he's young; yes, boss, a savage, man-eating beast!' 
He shook his head. 

'Oh, he eats sheep, too, and hens and pigs, but if he doesn't eat men his belly's not 

satisfied.' 

23 

He added as he crushed out his cigarette in the coffee saucer: 

'No, his belly's not satisfied. Now, what does the old owl have to say to that, eh?' 

He did not wait for an answer. 

'What can you say, I wonder?' he continued, weighing me up. 'As far as I can see, 
your lordship's never been hungry, never killed, never stolen, never committed 
adultery. What ever can you know of the world? You've got an innocent's brain and 
your skin's never even felt the sun/ he muttered with obvious scorn. 
I became ashamed of my delicate hands, my pale face and my life which had not 
been bespattered with mud and blood. 

'All right!' said Zorba, sweeping his heavy hand across the table as if wiping a sponge 
across it. 'All right! There's one thing, though, I'd like to ask you. You must've gone 
through hundreds of books, perhaps you know the answer ...' 
'Go ahead, Zorba, what is it?' 

There's a sort of miracle happening here, boss. A funny sort of miracle which puzzles 
me. All that business - those lousy tricks, thefts and that slaughter of ours -1 mean of 
us rebels - all that brought Prince George to Crete. Liberty!' 
He looked at me with his eyes wide open in amazement. 

'It's a mystery,' he murmured, 'a great mystery! So, if we want liberty in this bad world, 
we've got to have all those murders, all those lousy tricks, have we? I tell you, If I 
began to go over all the bloody villainy and all the murders we did, you'd have your 
hair stand on end. And yet, the result of all that, what's it been? Liberty! Instead of 
wiping us out with a thunderbolt, God gives us liberty! I just don't understand!' 
He looked at me, as if calling for help. I could see that this problem had tormented him 
a lot and that he could not get to the bottom of it. 
'Do you understand?' he asked me with anguish. 

Understand what? Tell him what? Either that what we call God does not exist, or else 



that what we call murders and 
24 

villainy is necessary for the struggle and for the liberation of the world ... 

I tried hard to find for Zorba another, simpler way of explaining it. 

'How does a plant sprout and grow into a flower on manure and muck? Say to 

yourself, Zorba, that the manure and muck is man and the flower liberty.' 

'But the seed?' cried Zorba, striking his fist on the table. 'For a plant to sprout there 

must be a seed. Who's put such a seed in our entrails? And why doesn't this seed 

produce flowers from kindness and honesty? Why must it have blood and filth?' 

I shook my head. 

1 don't know,' I said. 

'Who does?' 

'No one.' 

'But then,' Zorba cried in despair and casting wild glances about him, 'what d'you 

expect me to do with all your boats, and your machines and neckties?' 

Two or three passengers whom the sea had upset, and who were now drinking coffee 

at a nearby table, revived. They sensed a quarrel and pricked up their ears. 

This disgusted Zorba. He lowered his voice. 

'Change the subject/ he said. 'When I think of that, I feel like breaking anything within 
reach - a chair, a lamp, or my head against the wall. But what good would that do me? 
I'd have to pay the breakages and go to a chemist and have my head bandaged. And 
if God exists, well, it's far worse: we're bloody well done for! He must be peering at me 
from up there in the sky and bursting his sides with laughter.' 
He suddenly made a movement with his hand as if getting rid of an importunate fly. 
'Never mind!' he said regretfully. 'All I wanted to tell you was this: When the royal ship 
arrived all decked up with flags, and they began to fire off rounds from the guns, and 
the prince set foot on Cretan soil ... Have you ever seen a 
25 

whole people gone mad because they've seen their liberty? No? Ah, boss, then blind 
you were born and blind you'll die. If I live a thousand years, even if all that remains of 
me is a morsel of living flesh, what I saw that day I'll never forget! And if each of us 
could choose his paradise in the sky, according to his taste - and that's how it should 
be, that's what I call paradise - I'd say to the Almighty: 'Lord, let my paradise be a 
Crete decked with myrtle and flags and let the minute when Prince George set foot on 
Cretan soil last for centuries! That'll do me.' 

Zorba became silent once more. He raised his moustache, filled a glass to the brim 
with iced water and swallowed it in one gulp. 
'What happened in Crete, Zorba? Tell me!' 

'Do we have to start making big sentences?' said Zorba, annoyed. 'Look here, I tell 

you, I do - this world is a mystery and man is just a great brute. 

'A great brute and a god. A blackguard of a rebel who'd come from Macedonia with 

me - Yorga, they called him, a gallows' bird, a real swine, you know - well, he wept. 

'Why're you crying, Yorga, you hound?' I said, and my eyes were streaming too. 

'Why're you crying, you old swine?' But he just threw his arms round my neck and 

blubbered like a kid. And then that miserly bastard pulls out his purse, empties onto 

his lap the gold coins he'd looted from the Turks and throws them into the air by 

handfuls! D'you see, boss, that's what liberty is!' 

I rose and went up on deck, to be buffeted by the keen sea breeze. 

That's what liberty is, I thought. To have a passion, to amass pieces of gold and 

suddenly to conquer one's passion and throw the treasure to the four winds. 

Free yourself from one passion to be dominated by another and nobler one. But is not 

that, too, a form of slavery? To sacrifice oneself to an idea, to a race, to God? Or does 

it mean that the higher the model the longer the tether of our 



26 

slavery? Then we can enjoy ourselves and frolic in a more spacious arena and die 
without having come to the end of the tether. Is that, then, what we call liberty? 
Towards the end of the afternoon we berthed by the sandy shore and saw finely sifted 
white sand, oleanders still in flower, fig and carob trees, and, further to the right, a low 
grey hill without a tree, resembling the face of a woman resting. And beneath her chin, 
along her neck, ran the dark brown veins of lignite. 

An autumnal wind was blowing, frayed clouds were passing slowly over the earth and 
softening its contours with shadow. Other clouds were rising menacingly in the sky. 
The sun appeared and disappeared, and the earth's surface was brightened and 
darkened like a living and perturbed face. 

I stopped for a moment on the sand and looked. A sacred solitude lay before me, 
deadly and yet fascinating, like the desert. The Buddhist song rose out of the very soil 
and found its way to the depths of my being. 'When shall I at last retire into solitude, 
alone, without companions, without joy and without sorrow, with only the sacred 
certainty that all is a dream? When, in my rags - without desires - shall I retire 
contented into the mountains? When, seeing that my body is merely sickness and 
crime, age and death, shall I - free, fearless and blissful - retire into the forest? When? 
When, oh when?' 

Zorba, with his santuri beneath his arm, his steps still unsteady, came towards me. 
'There's the lignite!' I said, to hide my emotions. And I stretched my arm towards the 
hill with the womanlike face. 
Zorba frowned without looking round. 

'Later. This isn't the time, boss,' he said. 'Must wait for the earth to stop. She's still 
pitching, the devil take her, like the deck of a ship. Let's go to the village.' 
With these words he set off with long, determined strides, trying to save his face. 
Two barefooted urchins, as brown as Arabs, ran up and took charge of the luggage. A 
huge customs officer was smoking a hookah in the customs shed. He scrutinised us 
from out of the corner of his blue eyes, took a nonchalant glance at the bags, and 
shifted momentarily on his seat as if he was going to get up. But it was too much of an 
effort. He slowly raised the hookah tube and said in a sleepy voice: 'Welcome!' 
One of the urchins came up to me. He winked with his olive-black eyes and said in a 
mocking tone: 

'He's no Cretan. He's a lazy devil.' 
'Aren't Cretans lazy devils, too?' 

'They are ... yes, they are,' the young Cretan replied, 'but in a different way.' 
'Is the village far?' 

'Only a gun-shot from here. Look, behind the gardens, in the ravine. A fine village, sir. 
Plenty of everything - carob trees, beans, grain, oil, wine. And down there in the sand, 
the earliest cucumbers, tomatoes, aubergines and water-melons in Crete. It's the 
winds from Africa makes them swell. At night, in the orchard, you can hear them 
crackling and getting bigger.' 

Zorba was going on in front. His head was still swimming. He spat. 

'Chin up, Zorba!' I called to him. 'We've scraped through all right. There's nothing more 

to fear!' 

We walked quickly. The earth was mixed with sand and shells, and here and there 
grew a tamarisk, a wild fig tree, a tuft of reeds, some bitter mullein. The weather was 
sultry, the clouds were gathering lower and lower, the wind was dropping. 
We were passing by a great fig tree with a twisted double trunk which was beginning 
to grow hollow with age. One of the urchins stopped and with a jerk of the chin pointed 
to the old tree. 

"The Fig Tree of Our Young Lady!' he said. 
28 

I started. On this Cretan soil, every stone, every tree has its tragic history. 



'Of Our Young Lady? Why that name?' 

'In my grandfather's time, the daughter of one of our landowners fell in love with a 
shepherd boy. But her father wouldn't hear of it. The young lady wept, screamed and 
pleaded. The old man never changed his nine! One night the young couple 
disappeared. The countryside was searched, but for one, two, three days, a whole 
week, they weren't to be found. Then they began to stink, so the stench was followed 
and they were found rotting beneath this fig tree, locked in each other's arms. You 
see, they found them through the stench.' 

The child burst out laughing. The sounds of the village could be heard. Dogs began to 
bark, women to talk shrilly, cocks to announce the change in the weather. In the air 
floated the odour of grapes which came from the vats where arack was being distilled. 
"There's the village!' shouted the two boys, and rushed off. 

As soon as we had rounded the sandy hill the little village came into sight. It seemed 
to be clambering up the side of the ravine. Whitewashed terraced houses huddled 
together. Their open windows made dark patches, and they resembled whitened 
skulls jammed between the rocks. 
I caught up with Zorba. 

'Mind you behave, now we're entering the village,' I told him. "They mustn't get wind of 
us, Zorba. We'll act like serious business-men. I'm the manager and you're the 
foreman. Cretans don't take things lightly. As soon as they've set eyes on you, they 
pick on anything queer, and give you a nickname. After that, you can't get rid of it. You 
run about like a dog with a saucepan tied to its tail.' 

Zorba seized his moustache in his fist and plunged into meditation. Finally he said: 
'Listen, boss, if there's a widow in the place, you've no need to fear. If there isn't...' 
29 

Just then, as we entered the village, a beggar-woman clothed in rags rushed towards 
us with outstretched hand. She was swarthy, filthy, and had a stiff little black 
moustache. 

'Hi, brother!' she called familiarly to Zorba. 'Hi, brother, got a soul, have you?' 

Zorba stopped. 

'I have,' he replied gravely. 

Then give me five drachmas!' 

Zorba pulled out of his pocket a dilapidated leather purse. 

"There/ he said, and his lips, which still had a bitter expression, softened into a smile. 
He looked round and said: 

'Looks as if souls are cheap in these parts, boss! Five drachmas a soul!' 

The village dogs bounded towards us, the women leaned over the terraces to gaze at 

us, the children followed us, yelling. Some of them yelped, others made sounds like 

Klaxons, still others ran in front of us and looked at us with their big eyes full of 

amazement. 

We arrived at the village square, where we found two huge white poplars surrounded 
by crudely carved trunks which served as seats. Opposite was the cafe, over which 
hung an enormous, faded sign: The Modesty Cafe-and-Butcher's-Shop. 
'Why are you laughing?' Zorba asked. 

But I did not have time to reply. From the door of the cafe and butcher's shop ran out 
five or six giants wearing dark-blue breeches with red waistbands. They shouted: 
'Welcome, friends! Come in and have an arack. It's still warm from the vat.' 
Zorba clicked his tongue and said: 'What about it, boss?' He turned round and winked 
at me. 'Shall we have one?' 

We drank a glass and it burned our insides. The proprietor of the cafe-butchery, who 

was a brisk, tough, well-preserved old man, brought out chairs for us. 

I asked where we might lodge. 

'Go to Madame Hortense's,' someone shouted. 

30 



'A Frenchwoman here?' I exclaimed in surprise. 

'From the devil knows where; she's been all over the place. She's managed to avoid 
going on all the rocks you can think of, and now she's clung on to the last one here 
and has opened an inn.' 
'She sells sweets too!' cried a child. 

'She powders and paints herself up,' someone else said. 'She puts a ribbon round her 

neck... And she's got a parrot.' 

'A widow?' Zorba asked. 'Is she a widow?' 

The cafe proprietor seized his thick grey beard. 

'How many whiskers can you count here, friend? How many? Well, she's widow of as 
many husbands. Get the idea?' 
'Got it,' Zorba replied, licking his lips. 
'She might make you a widower, too!' 

'Mind your step, friend!' shouted an old man, and all burst out laughing. 

We were treated to a new round and the cafe proprietor brought it to us on a tray, 

together with barley-loaf, goat-cheese and pears. 

'Now leave these people alone. They mustn't dream of going to madame's! They're 
going to spend the night right here!' 

Tm going to have them, Kondomanolio!' said the old man. T've got no children. My 
house is big and there's plenty of room.' 

'Sorry, uncle Anagnosti,' the cafe proprietor shouted in the old man's ear. 'I spoke 
first.' 

'You take one,' said old Anagnosti; Til take t'other, the old 'un.' 
'Which old 'un?' said Zorba, stung to the quick. 

'We'll, stick together,' I said, and made a sign to Zorba not to get annoyed. 'We'll stick 
together and we'll go to Madame Hortense's ...' 

'Welcome! Welcome to you!' A dumpy, plump little woman, with bleached flax- 
coloured hair, appeared beneath the poplars, waddling along on her bandy legs. A 
beauty spot, from which sprang sow-bristles, adorned her chin. She was wearing a 
red-velvet ribbon round her neck, and her withered cheeks were plastered with mauve 
powder. A gay little lock of hair danced on her brow and made her look somewhat like 
Sarah Bernhardt in her old age playing L' Aiglon. 

'Delighted to meet you, Madame Hortense!' I replied, preparing to kiss her hand, 
carried away as I was by a sudden good humour. 

Life appeared all at once like a fairy-tale or the opening scene of The Tempest. We 
had just set foot on the island, soaked to the skin after an imaginary shipwreck. We 
were exploring the marvellous coasts, and ceremoniously greeting the inhabitants of 
the place. This woman, Hortense, seemed to me to be the queen of the island, a sort 
of blonde and glistening walrus who had been cast up, half-rotting, on this sandy 
shore. Behind her appeared the numerous dirty, hairy faces radiating the general 
good humour of the people - or of Caliban - who gazed at the queen with pride and 
scorn. 

Zorba, the prince in disguise, also stared at her, as if she were an old comrade, an old 
frigate who had fought on distant seas, who had known victory and defeat, her 
hatches battered in, her masts broken, her sails torn - and who now, scored with 
furrows which she had caulked with powder and cream, had retired to this coast and 
was waiting. Surely she was waiting for Zorba, the captain of the thousand scars. And 
I was delighted to see these two actors meet at last in a Cretan setting which had 
been very simply produced and painted in a few broad strokes of the brush. 
'Two beds, Madame Hortense,' I said, bowing before this old specialist in the art of 
acting love scenes. Two beds, and no bugs.' 

'No bugs! I should think not!' she cried, throwing me a provocative glance. 
32 



'Oh no!' shouted the mocking mouths of Caliban. 

"There aren't! There aren't!' she retorted, stamping on the stones with her plump foot. 
She was wearing thick sky-blue stockings and a pair of battered court-shoes with 
dainty silk bows. 

'Off with you, prima donna! The devil take you!' Caliban roared once more. 

But, with great dignity, Dame Hortense was already going and opening up the way for 

us. She smelt of powder and cheap soap. 

Zorba followed her, devouring her with his eyes. 

Take an eyeful of that, boss,' he confided. "The way the trollop swings her hips, plaf! 
plaf! like an ewe with a tailful of fat!' 

Two or three big drops of rain fell, the sky clouded over. Blue lightning flickered over 
the mountain. Young girls, wrapped in their little white goat-skin capes, were hurriedly 
bringing back from pasture the family goats and sheep. The women, squatting in front 
of their hearths, were kindling the evening fire. 

Zorba bit his moustache impatiently, without taking his eyes off the rolling buttocks of 
the woman. 

'Hm!' he suddenly muttered with a sigh. To hell with life! The jade's never done playing 

us tricks!' 

Ill 

d 

ame hortense's hotel consisted of a row of old bathing-huts joined together. The first 
was the shop where you could buy sweets, cigarettes, peanuts, lamp-wicks, 
alphabets, candles and benjamin. Four adjoining huts formed the dormitory. Behind, in 
the yard, were the kitchen, the wash-house, the hen-house and the rabbit hutches. 
Thick bamboos and prickly pears were planted in the fine sand all round. The whole 
place smelled of the sea, excrement and urine. But, from time to time, Dame Hortense 
passed by and 
33 

the air changed its odour - as if someone had emptied a hairdresser's bowl under your 
nose. 

As soon as the beds were ready we retired and slept without a break till the morning. I 
do not remember the dream I had, but I rose lightly and as fit as if I had come fresh 
from a dip in the sea. 

It was Sunday, the workmen were to come on Monday from neighbouring villages and 
begin work at the mine, so I had time this day to take a turn round the shores on which 
fate had cast me. Dawn was hardly peeping through when I started out. I went past 
the gardens, followed the edge of the sea, hurriedly made my acquaintance with the 
water, earth and air of the spot, picked wild plants, and the palms of my hands 
became redolent with savory, sage and mint. 

I climbed a hill and looked round. An austere countryside of granite and very hard 
limestone. Dark carob and silvery olive trees, figs and vines. In the sheltered hollows, 
orange groves, lemon and medlar trees; near the shore, kitchen gardens. To the 
south, an expanse of sea, still angry and roaring as it came rushing from Africa to bite 
into the coast of Crete. Nearby, a low, sandy islet flushing rosy pink under the first 
rays of the sun. 

To my mind, this Cretan countryside resembled good prose, carefully ordered, sober, 
free from superfluous ornament, powerful and restrained. It expressed all that was 
necessary with the greatest economy. It had no flippancy, nor artifice about it. It said 
what it had to say with a manly austerity. But between the severe lines one could 
discern an unexpected sensitiveness and tenderness; in the sheltered hollows the 
lemon and orange trees perfumed the air, and from the vastness of the sea emanated 
an inexhaustible poetry. 



'Crete,' I murmured. 'Crete ...' and my heart beat fast. 

I came down from the little hill to the edge of the water. Chattering girls appeared with 
fichus as white as snow, long yellow boots, and skirts rucked up; they were going to 
mass 
34 

in the convent over there, gleaming a dazzling white by the sea. 
I stopped. As soon as they noticed me, the girls' laughter ceased. At the sight of a 
strange man their expression became one of wild distrust. Their whole bearing from 
head to foot, was suddenly on the defensive, their fingers clutched nervously at their 
tightly buttoned blouses. Fear surged in their blood. For centuries the Corsairs had 
made sudden incursions on to the whole of the Cretan coast facing Africa, ravishing 
ewes, women and children. They bound them with their red belts, threw them into the 
bottoms of their ships and set sail to sell them in Algiers, Alexandria, Beirut. For 
centuries the waters round these shores, festooned with black tresses, have 
resounded with lamentations. I watched these frightened girls advance, clinging 
together as if to form an impassable barrier. It was an instinctive reaction, indispens- 
able in earlier times and today repeated without reason. A bygone necessity dictated 
the rhythm of their movements. 

As the girls passed in front of me, I quietly stepped aside, smiling. And immediately, 
as if they suddenly felt that the danger they feared had passed centuries ago, and that 
they had awakened in our age of security, their faces lit up, the serried line of battle 
spread out and, all together, they bade me good-day in clear and light-hearted tones. 
At the same time the merry, sportive bells of the distant convent filled the air with 
sounds of rejoicing. 

The sun had risen, the sky was clear. I crouched among the rocks, perched like a 
seagull on a ledge, and contemplated the sea. My body felt powerful, fresh and 
obedient. And my mind, following the waves, became itself a wave, unresisting, 
submissive to the rhythm of the sea. 

Then my heart began to swell. Obscure, pleading and imperious voices rose within 
me. I knew who was calling to me. Whenever I was alone for a moment, this being 
cried out, in an anguish of horrible presentiments, transports and mad fears - waiting 
to be delivered by me. 
35 

I hurriedly opened Dante, my travelling companion, in order not to hear and to 
exorcise the fearful demon. I turned over the pages, reading a line here and there, or 
a tercet, and committing to memory the entire canto. Out of those fiery pages the 
damned rose howling. Half-way up the rocks, wounded souls sought to scale a 
precipitous mountainside. Higher still, the souls of the blessed moved among the 
emerald fields, like brilliant fireflies. I wandered from the highest to the lowest regions 
of the terrible house of destiny; I went freely about hell, purgatory and paradise, as if 
in my own dwelling. I suffered, I awaited or tasted beatitude, carried away as I was by 
those superb verses. 

Suddenly I closed my Dante and looked out over the sea. A gull, its breast resting on 
the water, rose and fell with the waves, abandoning itself to them and enjoying the 
pleasures of abandonment. A youth, sunburnt and bare-foot, appeared .at the water's 
edge singing love-songs. Maybe he understood the pain they expressed, for his voice 
had begun to grow hoarse, like that of a cockerel. 

For hundreds of years, Dante's verses have been sung in the poet's country. And just 
as love songs prepare boys and girls for love, so the ardent Florentine verses 
prepared Italian youths for the day of deliverance. From generation to generation, all 
communed with the soul of the poet and so transformed their slavery into freedom. 
I heard a laugh behind me and at once fell from the Dan-tesque heights. I looked 
round and saw Zorba behind me, his whole face creased with laughter. 
'Well, boss, this is a fine way of going on!' he cried. 'Here I've been looking for you for 



hours, but how could I know where to get hold of you?' 
Seeing I remained silent, he continued: 

'It's gone midday, the hen is cooked; the poor thing'll be dropping to bits, you know!' 
36 

'Yes, I know, but I'm not hungry.' 

'Not hungry!' Zorba exclaimed, slapping his thighs. 'But you've not had a bite since 
morning. The body's got a soul, too, have pity on it. Give it something to eat, boss, 
give it something; it's our beast of burden, you know. If you don't feed it, it'll leave you 
stranded in the middle o' the road.' 

I had despised the pleasures of the flesh for years, and, if possible, I would have 
eaten secretly, as if committing a shameful act. But so that Zorba would not grumble I 
said: 

'All right, I'm coming.' 

We started off in the direction of the village. The hours amongst the rocks had passed 

as time passes between lovers, like lightning. 

'Were you thinking of the lignite?' Zorba asked with some hesitation. 

'And what else d'you expect me to be thinking about?' I replied, laughing. Tomorrow 

we'll start work. I had to make some calculations.' 

'What's the result of the calculations?' he asked, as he made his way carefully. 
'After three months we must extract ten tons of lignite a day to cover expenses.' 
Zorba looked at me again, this time anxiously. A little later he said: 
'And why the devil d'you have to go down to the sea to make calculations? Pardon 
me, boss, for asking this question, but I don't understand. When I have to wrestle with 
figures, I feel I'd like to stuff myself into a hole in the ground, so I can't see anything. If 
I raise my eyes and see the sea, or a tree, or a woman - even if she's an old 'un - 
damme if all the sums and figures don't go to blazes. They grow wings and I have to 
chase 'em ...' 

'But that's your fault, Zorba,' I said to tease him. 'You don't concentrate.' 

'Maybe you're right, boss. It all depends on the way you look at it. There are cases 

even wise old Solomon ... Look, 

37 

one day I had gone to a little village. An old grandfather of ninety was busy planting an 
almond tree. "What, grandad!" I exclaimed. "Planting an almond tree?" And he, bent 
as he was, turned round and said: "My son, I carry on as if I should never die." I 
replied: "And I carry on as if I was going to die any minute." Which of us was right, 
boss?' 

He looked at me triumphantly and said: 
"That's where I've got you!' 

I kept silent. Two equally steep and bold paths may lead to the same peak. To act as 
if death did not exist, or to act thinking every minute of death, is perhaps the same 
thing. But when Zorba asked me the question, I did not know. 

'Well?' Zorba said mockingly. 'Don't worry, boss, you can't argue that out. Let's talk of 
something else. Just now I'm thinking of the chicken and the pilaff sprinkled with 
cinnamon. My brain's steaming like the pilaff, Let's eat first, ballast up first, then we'll 
see. Everything in good time. In front of us now is the pilaff; let our minds become 
pilaff. Tomorrow the lignite will be in front of us; our minds must become lignite! No 
half-measures, you know.' 

We entered the village. The women were sitting in their doorways gossiping. The old 
men, leaning on their sticks, were silent. Under a pomegranate tree laden with fruit a 
little shrivelled old woman was delousing her grandson. 

In front of the cafe an old man with a grave, concentrated expression and an aquiline 
nose was standing erect. He had a distinguished air. He was Mavrandoni, the village 
elder who had rented the lignite mine to us. He had called the previous evening at 
Dame Hortense's to take us to his house. He said: 



'It's a scandal for you to be staying at her hotel as if there were no men in the village.' 
He was grave, he weighed his words carefully as one of the leading villagers. We had 
refused. This had offended him, but he had not insisted. 
38 

'I have done my duty/ he said as he departed. 'You are free.' 

A little later he sent us two cheeses, a basket of pomegranates, a jar of raisins and 

figs, and a demijohn of arack. His servant said, as he unloaded his tiny ass: 

'With the compliments of Captain Mavrandoni. It's nothing much, he asked me to tell 

you, but it's meant well.' 

We now greeted the head of the village volubly and cordially. 

'Long life to you!' he said, placing his hand on his breast. Then he fell silent. 

'He doesn't like to talk much,' Zorba murmured. 'He's an old stick.' 

'He's proud,' I said. 'I like him.' 

We were arriving. Zorba's nostrils were quivering joyously. As soon as Dame 
Hortense saw us from the threshold she uttered a cry and ran into the kitchen. 
Zorba put the table in the yard under the leafless vine-arbour. He cut thick slices of 
bread, brought the wine and set the table. He looked round at me wickedly and 
pointed to the table. He had set for three people! 
'D'you see, boss?' he whispered. 
'Yes, I see, you old rip!' I replied. 

'It's the old birds who make the best stew,' he said, licking his lips. 'You take it from 
me.' 

He moved nimbly, his eyes sparkling. He hummed old love songs. 

"That's the way to live, boss. Have a good time and the bird into the bargain. You see, 

I'm doing things now as if I was going to die next minute. And I'm making it snappy, so 

I don't kick the bucket before I've had the bird!' 

To table!' Dame Hortense ordered. 

She lifted the pot and set it down in front of us. But she stood gaping. She had seen 
the three plates. Crimson with pleasure, she looked at Zorba and blinked her sharp 
little periwinkle-blue eyes. 
39 

'She's got hot pants, all/ Zorba whispered. 

Then, with extreme politeness, he turned to the lady and said: 

'Beautiful nymph of the waves, we are shipwrecked and the sea has cast up us in your 
realm. Do us the honour, my siren, of sharing our meal!' 

The old cabaret singer opened her arms wide and closed them again as if she would 
have liked to embrace the two of us. She swayed gracefully, brushed against Zorba, 
then me, and ran, chuckling, to her room. Soon after she reappeared, twittering, 
flaunting her charms and dressed in her very best: an old shiny velvet dress, 
decorated with worn yellow braid. Her bodice remained hospitably open and on it she 
had pinned a full-blown artificial rose. In her hand she held the parrot's cage which 
she hung in the vine-arbour. 

We made her sit between us, with Zorba to her right and me to her left. 
We all three set to ravenously. For a long time we did not utter a word. We were 
feeding the beast and slaking its thirst with wine. The food was soon changed into 
blood, the world became more beautiful, the woman at our sides became younger 
every minute, the lines in her face were disappearing. The parrot, hanging in front of 
us in his green jacket and yellow waistcoat, leaned forward to watch us. He looked like 
some odd little fellow under a spell, or else the spirit of the old cabaret singer wearing 
a green-and-yellow dress. And above our heads the vine-arbour was suddenly 
covered with large bunches of black grapes. 

Zorba's eyes were rolling, he flung open his arms as if he wanted to embrace the 
whole world. 

'What's happening, boss?' he cried, in astonishment. 'We drink one little glass of wine 



and the world goes haywire. Ah, boss, life's a rum thing. On your honour, are those 
grapes hanging there above our heads, or are they angels? I don't know. Or else 
they're nothing at all, and nothing exists, 

neither chicken, nor siren, nor Crete! Speak, boss, speak, so I don't go right off my 
head!' 

Zorba was beginning to get lively. He had finished with the chicken and was beginning 
to look at Dame Hortense gluttonously. His eyes were ravishing her; they looked her 
up and down, slipped into her swelling bosom as if they touched her. Our lady's little 
eyes were shining too; she liked the wine and had emptied several glasses of it. The 
mischievous demon in the wine had carried her back to the good old days. She 
became once more tender, merry and expansive. She rose and bolted the outside 
door so that the villagers could not see her -' the barbarians', as she called them. She 
lit a cigarette, and from her little French retrousse nose began to issue wreaths of 
smoke. 

At such times all the doors of a woman's being are opened. The sentinels relax and a 
kind word is as powerful as gold or love. So I lit my pipe and pronounced the kind 
word. 

'Dame Hortense, you remind me of Sarah Bernhardt ... when she was young. I didn't 
expect to find such elegance, such grace and courtesy, such beauty, in this wild 
place. What Shakespeare was it sent you here amongst the barbarians?' 
'Shakespeare?' she queried, opening wide her pale little eyes. 'What Shakespeare?' 
Her mind flew back rapidly to the theatres she had been to. In the twinkling of an eye, 
she made a tour of the cafes-concerts, cabarets and taverns, from Paris to Beirut, and 
from there along the coast of Anatolia. Suddenly she remembered. It was in 
Alexandria, a great theatre with chandeliers, plush seats, men and women, bare 
backs, perfumes, flowers. All at once the curtain rose and a fearful black man 
appeared ... 

'What Shakespeare?' she asked again proudly, having remembered. "The one they 
also call Othello?' 

The same. What Shakespeare, my white lily, cast you on these savage rocks?' 
She looked around her. The doors were closed, the parrot was asleep, the rabbits 
were mating, we were alone. She was 
40 

touched and began to open her heart to us. It was like opening an old chest, full of 
spices, yellowed love-letters and ancient dresses. 

She spoke Greek after a fashion, murdering the words and mixing up the syllables. 
However, we understood her perfectly. Sometimes we had great difficulty in 
suppressing our laughter, sometimes - we had drunk a good deal - we burst into tears. 
'Well' - this is roughly what the old siren told us in her perfumed yard - 'well, the 
person you're looking at now was never a tavern-singer, oh no! I was a famous artist 
and wore silk underclothes with real lace. But love ...' 
She sighed deeply and lit another cigarette from Zorba's. 

'I loved an admiral. Crete was once more in a state of revolution and the fleets of the 
great powers had anchored in the port of Suda. A few days later I also anchored 
there. Ah, what splendour! You should have seen the four admirals: the English, the 
French, the Italian and the Russian. All gold braid, patent-leather shoes and plumed 
hats. Like cocks. Great cocks weighing from twelve to fifteen stone each. And what 
beards! They were curly, silky, dark, fair, grey, red -and how nice they smelt! Each 
one had his own particular perfume - that's how I could distinguish between them in 
the dark. England smelled of eau-de-Cologne, France of violets, Russia of musk, and 
Italy, ah, Italy doted on patchouli. My God, what beards, what beards! 
'Many times, when we were gathered on board the flagship, we talked about the 
revolution. Their uniforms were unclasped and my silk chemise was sticking to my 
skin, because they poured champagne over it. It was summer, you know. We were 



speaking about the revolution, having a serious conversation, and I caught hold of 
their beards and begged them not to bombard the poor dear Cretans. We could see 
them through the binoculars on a rock near Canea. They looked tiny, quite tiny, like 
ants with blue breeches and yellow boots. And they shouted and shouted, and they 
had a flag.' 

There was a movement in the bamboos which surrounded the yard. The old female 
warrior stopped, terrified. Between the leaves, wicked little eyes were gleaming. The 
village children had sensed we were junketing and were spying on us. 
The cabaret singer tried to rise to her feet, but she could not. She had eaten and 
drunk too much, she sat back in a sweat. Zorba picked up a stone. The children 
scattered, screaming. 

'Go on, my beauty! Go on, my treasure!' Zorba said, and pushed his chair still closer 
to her. 

'So I said to the Italian admiral - 1 was more familiar with him - 1 seized his beard and 
said to him: "My Canavaro" -that was his name - "please, my little Canavaro, no 
boom-boom! No boom-boom!" 

'How many times the woman you see here has saved the Cretans from death! How 
many times the guns were ready loaded and I seized the admiral's beard and wouldn't 
let him "boom-boom!" But what thanks have I ever had for that? Look what I get in the 
way of decorations ...' 

Dame Hortense was angry at the ingratitude of men. She struck the table with her soft 
and wrinkled fist. Zorba stretched out his practised hands over her parted knees and 
seized them, carried away by a feigned emotion, and he cried: 
'My Bouboulina!* For pity's sake, no boom-boom!' 

'Hands off!' our good lady said, chuckling, 'Who d'you take me for?' And she gave him 
a languorous glance. 

'There's a God in heaven,' said the crafty debauchee. 'Don't upset yourself, my 
Bouboulina. We're here, sweetheart, don't be afraid.' 

The old siren raised her acid-blue eyes to heaven. She saw her green parrot asleep in 
his cage. 

* Bouboulina was a heroine of the war of independence (1821-8). She fought valiantly 

on the sea like Canaris and Miaoulis. 

43 

'My Canavaro, my little Canavaro!' she cooed amorously. 

The parrot, recognising her voice, opened his eyes, clutched hold of the bars of his 
cage and started to cry in the hoarse voice of a drowning man: 'Canavaro! Canavaro!' 
'Present!' cried Zorba, once more applying his hands to those old knees which had 
seen so much service, this time as if he wanted to take possession of them. The old 
cabaret singer wriggled in her chair and again opened her little puckered lips. 
T, too, have struggled valiantly, breast to breast. ... But the bad days came. Crete was 
liberated, the fleets had orders to leave. "And what is to become of me?" I said, 
seizing the four beards. "Where are you going to leave me? I have got used to 
grandeur, to champagne and roast chicken; I have got used to handsome little sailors 
saluting me; I shall be four times a widow! What is going to become of me, my lords 
and admirals?" 

'Oh, they just laughed - that's men for you! They loaded me with English and Italian 
pounds, roubles and napoleons. I stuffed them in my stockings, in my bodice and in 
my shoes. On the last evening I wept and sobbed so much the Admirals took pity on 
me. They filled the bath with champagne, plunged me in it - we were very familiar by 
then -and they drank the champagne from the bath in my honour. They got drunk and 
put out the light.... 

'In the morning I could smell all their perfumes on top of each other: the violet, the 
eau-de-Cologne, the musk and the patchouli. The four great powers - England, 
France, Russia and Italy - 1 held them here, here on my knees, and I went like this 



with them 

Dame Hortense held out her plump little arms and moved them up and down, as if she 
were bouncing a baby on her lap. 
"There, like that! Like that! 

'At daybreak they began to fire off their guns. I swear to this on my honour, they fired 

off their guns, and a white boat 

44 



with twelve oarsmen came out to fetch me and set me on shore.' 

She took her little handkerchief out and began to weep, inconsolably. 

'My Bouboulina/ Zorba cried rapturously, 'shut your eyes ... shut your eyes, my 

treasure. I am Canavaro!' 

'Hands off, I said!' our good lady simpered. 'Just look at your handsome self! Where 
are the golden epaulettes, the three-cornered hat, the perfumed beard? Ah, well 
then!...' 

She squeezed Zorba's hand gently and started to weep again. 
It was becoming cooler. We fell silent a while. The sea, behind the bamboos, was 
sighing. It had at last become gentle and peaceful. The wind had fallen, the sun sank 
to rest. Two crows passed over our heads and their wings whistled as if a piece of silk 
was being torn - the silk chemise of the songstress. 

The evening light fell like a spray of golden dust over the yard. Dame Hortense's 
fanciful lips caught alight and quivered in the evening breeze as if they wanted to take 
flight and carry the fire to her neighbours' heads. The golden light fell on her half- 
bared bosom, her parted knees which had grown fat with age, the lines in her neck, 
her worn-out court-shoes. 

Our old siren shuddered. Half-closing her little eyes, which were reddened by her 
tears and the wine, she looked first at me, then at Zorba, whose lips were parched, 
and who was fascinated by her bosom. She looked at each of us with a questioning 
air, trying to see which of us was Canavaro. 

'My Bouboulina/ Zorba cooed passionately, whilst pressing his knee against hers. 
'Don't worry, there's no God and no devil. Raise your little head, rest your cheek on 
your hand and give us a song. To hell with death!' 

Zorba was on fire. With his left hand he twisted his moustache, and his right hand 

strayed over the intoxicated 

45 

songstress. His words were breathless, his eyes languid. It was certainly not this 
mummified and outrageously painted old woman he was seeing before him, but the 
entire 'female species', as it was his custom to call women. The individual 
disappeared, the features were obliterated, whether young or senile, beautiful or ugly - 
those were mere unimportant variations. Behind each woman rises the austere, 
sacred and mysterious face of Aphrodite. 

That was the face Zorba was seeing and talking to, and desiring. Dame Hortense was 
only an ephemeral and transparent mask which Zorba tore away to kiss the eternal 
mouth. 

'Lift your snow-white neck, my treasure/ he repeated in his gasping pleading voice. 
'Lift your snow-white neck and sing us the song!' 

The old songstress rested her cheek on her plump hand, which was all cracked with 
washing clothes; her eyes became languorous. She uttered a wild and woeful cry, 
then began her favourite song, repeating it many times as she gazed at Zorba with 
swooning, half-closed eyes - she had already made her choice. 
Au filde mes jours Pourquoi t'ai-je rencontre ... 

Zorba leapt up, went for his santuri, sat on the ground Turkish fashion, undraped his 
instrument, rested it on his lap and stretched his great hands. 



'Oh! Oh!' he bellowed. Take a knife and cut my throat, Bouboulina!' 

When night began to fall, when the evening star revolved in the sky, and the coaxing 

voice of the santuri rose, abetting Zorba's aims, Dame Hortense, stuffed with chicken 

and rice, grilled almonds and wine, reeled heavily on to Zorba's shoulder and sighed. 

She rubbed herself gently against his bony sides, yawned and sighed afresh. 

Zorba made a sign to me and lowered his voice: 

46 

'She's in the mood, boss/ he whispered. 'Be a pal, and leave us.' 
