IV 

A 

' daybreak I opened my eyes and saw Zorba sitting opposite me at the end of his bed 
with his legs tucked up; he was smoking and absorbed in deep meditation. His little 
round eyes were fixed on the fanlight in front of him, which the first gleam of day tinted 
milky white. His eyes were swollen and his unusually long, bare, scraggy neck was 
stretched out like the neck of a bird of prey. 

The previous evening I had retired early, leaving him alone with the old siren. 

T'm going/1 said. 'Enjoy yourself, Zorba, and good luck to you!' 

'Good night, boss/ Zorba replied. 'Let us settle our little affair. Good night, boss. Sleep 

tight.' 

Apparently they did settle their little affair, for in my sleep I seemed to hear muffled 
cooings, and for a time the neighbouring room shook and trembled. Then sleep 
overcame me again. A long while after midnight, Zorba entered barefoot and stretched 
himself on his bed, very gently, so as not to wake me. 

In the first light, there he was, gazing into the distance with his lack-lustre eyes. You 
could see he was still sunk in a sort of torpor, his temples were not yet freed from 
sleep. Calmly, fondly, he was letting himself drift on a shady current as thick as honey. 
The whole universe of earth, water, thoughts and men was slowly drifting towards a 
distant sea, and Zorba was drifting away with it, unresistingly, unquestioningly, and 
happy. 

The village began to be roused - there was a confused murmur of cocks, pigs, asses 
and men. I wanted to leap from my bed and cry: 'Heigh! Zorba! We've work to do 
today!' But I too felt a great happiness in delivering myself up, 
47 

silently, to the rosy transformation of sunrise. In those magic minutes the whole of life 
seems as light as down. The earth constantly changes shape in the wind, like a soft 
and billowy cloud. 

I stretched out my arm; I, too, felt like having a smoke. I took my pipe. I looked at it 
with emotion. It was a big and precious one, 'Made in England'. It was a present from 
my friend - the one who had greyish-green eyes and slender fingers. That was 
abroad, years ago. He had finished his studies and was leaving that evening for 
Greece. 'Give up cigarettes/ he said. 'You light one, you smoke half of it and throw the 
rest away. Your love only lasts a minute. It's disgraceful. You'd better take up a pipe. 
It's like a faithful spouse. When you go home, it'll be there, quietly waiting for you. 
You'll light it, you'll watch the smoke rising in the air -and you'll think of me!' 
It was noon. We were leaving the Berlin museum, where he had been to have one last 
look at his favourite painting -Rembrandt's Warrior, with his bronze helmet, emaciated 
cheeks and his dolorous and strong-willed expression. 'If ever in my life I perform an 
action worthy of a man,' he murmured, as he gazed at the implacable and desperate 
warrior, 'It will be to him I shall owe it.' 

We were in the museum courtyard, leaning against a pillar. In front of us was a bronze 
statue of a naked Amazon, riding a wild horse with indescribable grace. A little grey 
bird, a wagtail, perched for a moment on the Amazon's head, turned towards us, 
jerking up its tail, uttered two or three times a mocking cry, and flew away. 
I shuddered, looked at my friend and asked: 



'Did you hear that bird? It seemed to say something to us, then it flew away.' 

My friend smiled. '"It's a bird, let it sing; it's a bird let it speak/" he said, quoting a line 

from one of our popular ballads. 

How was it that at this moment, at daybreak on this Cre- 
48 

tan coast, such a memory should come into my head, together with that faithful verse, 
and fill my mind with bitterness? 

I slowly worked some tobacco into my pipe and lit it. Everything in this world has a 
hidden meaning, I thought. Men, animals, trees, stars, they are all hieroglyphics; woe 
to any one who begins to decipher them and guess what they mean ... When you see 
them, you do not understand them. You think they are really men, animals, trees, 
stars. It is only years later, too late, that you understand ... 

The bronze-helmeted warrior, my friend leaning against the pillar, the wagtail and what 
it chirped to us, the verse from that melancholy ballad, all this, I thought today, may 
have a hidden meaning, but what can it be? 

My eyes followed the smoke which curled and uncurled in the dappled light. And my 
mind mingled with the smoke and slowly vanished in blue wreaths. After a long 
interval, without having any recourse to logic, I could see with utter certainty the origin, 
the growth and the disappearance of the world. It was as if I had once more plunged 
into Buddha, but this time without the delusive words and insolent acrobatic tricks of 
the mind. This smoke is the essence of his teaching, these vanishing spirals are life 
coming impatiently to a happy end in blue nirvana ... 

I sighed softly. As if this sigh had brought me back to the present minute, I looked 
round and saw the miserable wooden hut, and hanging on the wall a little mirror from 
which the first rays of the sun had just struck sparks. Opposite me, Zorba sat on his 
mattress, smoking, with his back to me. 

The previous day, with its tragi-comic fortunes, suddenly flashed into my mind. The 
smell of stale violet perfume - violet, eau-de-Cologne, musk and patchouli; a parrot, an 
almost human being transformed into a parrot and who beat his wings against the iron 
bars of his cage, calling the name of a former lover; and an old 
49 

Mahone,* only survivor of a whole fleet, who recounted ancient naval battles ... 
Zorba heard my sigh, shook his head and looked around. 

'We've behaved badly,' he murmured. 'We've behaved badly, boss. You laughed, so 
did I, and she saw us. And the way you left, without any fine words, as if she was an 
old bag of a hundred. What a damn shame! It's not polite, boss. That's not the way for 
a man to behave, let me tell you. She's a woman, after all, isn't she? A weak, fretful 
creature. A good job I stayed behind to console her.' 

'But what do you mean, Zorba?' I replied. 'Do you seriously think all women have 
nothing else but that in mind?' 

'Yes, boss, they've nothing else in mind. Listen to me, now ... I've seen all sorts, and 
I've done all kinds of things ... A woman has nothing else in view. She's a sickly 
creature, I tell you, and fretful. If you don't tell her you love and want her, she starts 
crying. Maybe she doesn't want you at all, maybe you disgust her, maybe she says 
no. That's another story. But all men who see her must desire her. That's what she 
wants, the poor creature, so you might try and please her! 

'I had a grandmother, she must have been eighty. What a tale that old soul's life would 
make! Never mind, that's another story, too ... Well, she must have been eighty in the 
shade, and opposite our house lived a young girl as fresh as a flower ... Krystallo she 
was called. Every Saturday evening, raw young bloods of the village would meet for a 
drink, and the wine made us lively. We stuck a sprig of basil behind our ears, one of 
my cousins took his guitar, and we went serenading. What love! What passion! We 
bellowed like bulls! We all wanted her, and every Saturday we went in a herd for her 
to make her choice. 



'Well, would you believe it, boss? It's a mystery! Women have a wound which never 
heals. Every wound heals but 

* Here a coasting vessel with sails. This name is also used for barges and formerly 

galleys. It comes from the Arabic, Ma'on. 

50 

that one - don't you take any notice of your books - that one never heals. What, just 
because a woman's eighty? The wound's still open. 

'So every Saturday the old girl pulled her mattress up to the window, took out her little 
mirror and combed away at the little bits of thatch she had left, and carefully made a 
parting. She'd look round slyly, for fear someone saw her. If anyone came near, she'd 
snuggle back and look as if butter wouldn't melt in her mouth, pretending she was 
dozing. But how could she sleep? She was waiting for the serenade. At eighty! You 
see what a mystery woman is, boss! Just now it makes me want to cry. But at that 
time I was just harum-scarum, I didn't understand and it made me laugh. One day I 
got annoyed with her. She was hauling me over the coals because I was running after 
the girls, so I told her straight out where to get off: "Why do you rub walnut leaves over 
your lips every Saturday, and part your hair? I s'pose you think we come to serenade 
you? It's Krystallo we're after. You're just a stinking old corpse!" 
'Would you believe it, boss! That day was the first time I knew what a woman was. 
Two tears sprang into my grandma's eyes. She curled up like a dog, and her chin 
trembled. "Krystallo!" I shouted, going nearer so as she'd hear better. "Krystallo!" 
Young people are cruel beasts, they're inhuman, they don't understand. My grandma 
raised her skinny arms to heaven. "Curse you from the bottom of my heart!" she cried. 
That very day she started to go into a decline. She wasted away and two months later, 
her days were numbered. Then when she was at her last gasp she saw me. She 
hissed like a turtle and tried to grab me with her withered fingers. "It was you who 
finished me off. May you be damned, Alexis, and suffer all I have!'" 
Zorba smiled. 

'Ah, the old witch's curse has hit home!' he said, stroking his moustache. 'I'm in my 

sixty-fifth year, I think, but even if I live to a hundred I'll never lay off. I'll still have a little 

mirror in my pocket, and I'll still be running after the female of the species.' 

He smiled once more, threw his cigarette through the fanlight, stretched his arms and 

said: 

'I've plenty of other faults, but that is the one that'll kill me.' 
He leapt from his bed. 

'Enough of all that. Cut the cackle. Today we work!' 

He dressed in a twinkling, put on his shoes and went out. 

With my head bowed, I ruminated on Zorba's words, and suddenly a distant snow- 
bound town came to my mind. I was at an exhibition of Rodin's works, and I had 
stopped to look at an enormous bronze hand, 'The Hand of God.' This hand was half 
closed, and in the palm an ecstatic man and woman were embracing and struggling. 
A girl came up and stopped beside me. She also looked and was moved at the 
disquieting, eternal embrace of man and woman. She was slim, well-dressed, she had 
a wealth of fair hair, a powerful chin and thin lips. There was something determined 
and virile about her. I normally hate inviting a conversation, and I do not know what 
urged me to turn to her and ask: 
'What are you thinking about?' 
'If only we could escape!' she murmured resentfully. 

'And go where? The hand of God is everywhere. There is no salvation. Are you 
sorry?' 

'No. Love may be the most intense joy on earth. It may be. But, now I see that bronze 
hand, I want to escape.' 
'You prefer freedom.' 



•Yes: 

'But, supposing it's only when we obey that bronze hand we are free? Supposing the 
word "God" didn't have that convenient meaning the masses give it?' 
She looked anxiously at me. Her eyes were of a metallic grey, her lips dry and bitter. 
'I don't understand,' she said, and moved away. 

She disappeared. Since then I had never thought any more of her. Nevertheless, she 
must have continued to live deep down in my heart, and today, on this empty coast, 
she reappeared, pale and plaintive, from the depths of my being. 
Yes, I had behaved badly. Zorba was right. That bronze hand was a good pretext. The 
first contact had succeeded, the first gentle words had been exchanged, and we might 
gradually, imperceptibly, have embraced and been united, undisturbed, in the hand of 
God. But I had suddenly darted from earth to heaven, and the woman had been 
startled and had fled. 

The old cock was crowing in Dame Hortense's yard. The white light of day was now 
peeping in through the little window. I leapt out of bed. 

The workmen had begun to arrive with their pickaxes, their crowbars and their 
mattocks. I heard Zorba giving his orders. He had thrown himself into the work straight 
away. One felt he was a man who knew how to command men, who loved 
responsibility. 

I put my head out of the fanlight and saw him standing, like a great gawk in the middle 
of thirty-odd lean, narrow-waisted, rough and weather-beaten men. His arm was 
stretched out authoritatively, his words were brief and to the point. Once he caught 
hold of a youngish fellow by the scruff of the neck because he was muttering and 
coming forward hesitatingly. 

'Got something to say, have you?' Zorba cried. 'Well, say it out aloud! I don't like 
mumblings. You've got to be in the mood to work. If you're not, get back to the tavern!' 
At that moment Dame Hortense appeared with tousled hair and swollen cheeks. She 
was not made up, and she was dressed in a full, dirty gown and was shuffling along in 
a pair of long, down-at-heel slippers. She coughed the raucous cough of old singers, 
like a donkey's braying. She stopped and looked with pride at Zorba. Her eyes 
became misty. She coughed again, so that he would notice her, and passed close 
53 

to him, swaying and wriggling her hips. Her broad sleeve almost brushed him. But he 
did not even turn round to look at her. He took a piece of barley cake and a handful of 
olives from a workman and shouted: 

'Now, men, in God's name, make the sign of the cross!' And, striding away, he led the 
gang in a beeline towards the mountain. 

I shall not describe here the work on the mine. It would need patience to do that, and I 
have none. Near the sea, we built a hut out of bamboo, osier and petrol-cans. Zorba 
used to awake at dawn, seize his pick, go to the mine before the men, open a gallery, 
abandon it, find a gleaming lignite seam and dance for joy. But after a few days he 
would lose the seam and he would fling himself down on the ground with his legs in 
the air and, with his feet and hands, make a mocking gesture at the sky. 
He had taken to the work. He no longer even consulted me. From the very first days 
all the care and responsibility had passed from my hands to his. His job was to make 
decisions and put them into execution. Mine was to pay the piper. This arrangement, 
moreover, suited me fairly well. For I sensed that these months would be the happiest 
in my life. Also, everything considered, I felt I was buying my happiness cheaply. 
My maternal grandfather, who lived in a fair-sized Cretan village, used to take his 
lantern every evening and go round the streets to see if, by chance, any stranger had 
arrived. He would take him to his house and give him an abundance of food and drink, 
after which he would sit on his divan, light his long Turkish pipe, his chibouk, and turn 
to his guest -for whom the time had come to repay the hospitality - and say in a 
peremptory tone: 



Talk!' 

'Talk about what, Father Moustoyorgi?' 

'What you are, who you are, where you come from, what 

54 

towns and villages you have seen - everything, tell me everything. Now, speak!' 
And the guest would begin to talk at random, uttering truths and falsehoods, whilst my 
grandfather, sitting calmly on his divan, smoked his chibouk, listening intently and fol- 
lowing the stranger in his travels. And if he liked the guest, he would say: 
'You shall stay tomorrow too. You're not going. You've still things to tell.' 
My grandfather had never left his village. He had never been even to Candia or 
Canea. 'Why go there?' he would say. "There are Candians and Caneans, peace be 
with them, who pass here - Candia and Canea come to me, so why need I go to 
them?' 

On this Cretan coast today I am perpetuating my grandfather's mania. I have also 
found a guest by the light of my lantern. I do not let him depart. He costs me far more 
than a dinner, but he is worth it. Every evening I wait for him after work, I make him sit 
opposite me and we eat. The time comes when he must pay, and T say to him: Talk!' I 
smoke my pipe and I listen. This guest has thoroughly explored the earth and the 
human soul. I never tire of listening to him. 
Talk, Zorba, talk!' 

When he speaks, the whole of Macedonia is immediately spread before my gaze, laid 
out in the little space between Zorba and myself, with its mountains, its forests, its 
torrents, its comitadjis, its hard-working women and great, heavily-built men. And also 
Mount Athos with its twenty-one monasteries, its arsenals and its broad-bottomed 
idlers. Zorba would shake his head as he finished his tales of monks and say, roaring 
with laughter: 'God preserve you, boss, from the stern of mules and the stem of 
monks!' 

Every evening Zorba takes me through Greece, Bulgaria and Constantinople. I shut 
my eyes and I see. He has been all over the racked and chaotic Balkans and 
observed everything with his little falcon-like eyes, which he constantly 
55 

opens wide in amazement. Things we are accustomed to, and which we pass by 
indifferently, suddenly rise up in front of Zorba like fearful enigmas. Seeing a woman 
pass by, he stops in consternation. 

'What is that mystery?' he asks. 'What is a woman, and why does she turn our heads? 
Just tell me, I ask you, what's the meaning of that?' 

He interrogates himself with the same amazement when he sees a man, a tree in 
blossom, a glass of cold water. Zorba sees everything every day as if for the first time. 
We .were sitting yesterday in front of the hut. When he had drunk a glass of wine, he 
turned to me in alarm: 

'Now whatever is this red water, boss, just tell me! An old stock grows branches, and 
at first there's nothing but a sour bunch of beads hanging down. Time passes, the sun 
ripens them, they become as sweet as honey, and then they're called grapes. We 
trample on them; we extract the juice and put it into casks; it ferments on its own, we 
open it on the feast-day of St. John-the-Drinker*, it's become wine! It's a miracle! You 
drink the red juice and, lo and behold, your soul grows big, too big for the old carcass, 
it challenges God to a fight. Now tell me, boss, how does it happen?' 
I did not answer. I felt, as I listened to Zorba, that the world was recovering its pristine 
freshness. All the dulled daily things regained the brightness they had in the begin- 
ning, when we came out of the hands of God. Water, women, the stars, bread, 
returned to their mysterious, primitive origin and the divine whirlwind burst once more 
upon the air. 

That is why, every evening, lying on the pebbles, I impatiently waited for Zorba. I 



would see him suddenly emerge out of the bowels of the earth and approach with his 

loose-knit body and long striding step. From afar I could see 

* The feast of Klydonas, held on the i$th August. It can be compared to Hallowe'en. 

56 

how the work had fared that day, by his bearing, by the way he held his head high or 
low, by the swing of his arms. 

At first I also went with him. I watched the men. I endeavoured to lead a different type 

of life, to interest myself in practical work, to know and love the human material which 

had fallen into my hands, to feel the long-wished-for joy of no longer having to deal 

with words but with living men. And I made romantic plans - if the extraction of lignite 

was successful - to organise a sort of community in which everything should be 

shared, where we should eat the same food together and wear the same clothes, like 

brothers. I created in my mind a new religious order, the leaven of a new life... 

But I had not yet made up my mind to acquaint Zorba with my project. He was irritated 

by my comings and goings amongst the workmen, questioning, interfering and always 

taking the workman's part. 

Zorba would purse his lips and say: 

'Boss, aren't you going for a stroll outside? The sun and the sea, you know!' 
At first I insisted, and would not go. I asked questions, gossiped, and got to know 
every man's history - how many children they had to feed, sisters to be married, 
helpless old relations; their cares, illnesses and worries. 

'Don't delve like that into their histories, boss,' Zorba would say, scowling. 'You'll be 
taken in, with your soft heart, and you'll like them more than's good for them or for our 
work. Whatever they do, you'll find excuses for them. Then, heaven help us, they'll 
scamp their work, do it any old how. Heaven help them, too, you'd better realise that. 
When the boss is hard, the men respect him, they work. When the boss is soft, they 
leave it all to him, and have an easy time, Get me?' 

Another evening, after work, he threw his pick down in the shed and shouted, out of all 
patience: 

'Look here, boss, do stop meddling. As fast as I build, you destroy. Now what are all 

those things you were telling them 

57 

opens wide in amazement. Things we are accustomed to, and which we pass by 
indifferently, suddenly rise up in front of Zorba like fearful enigmas. Seeing a woman 
pass by, he stops in consternation. 

'What is that mystery?' he asks. 'What is a woman, and why does she turn our heads? 
Just tell me, I ask you, what's the meaning of that?' 

He interrogates himself with the same amazement when he sees a man, a tree in 
blossom, a glass of cold water. Zorba sees everything every day as if for the first time. 
We.were sitting yesterday in front of the hut. When he had drunk a glass of wine, he 
turned to me in alarm: 

'Now whatever is this red water, boss, just tell me! An old stock grows branches, and 
at first there's nothing but a sour bunch of beads hanging down. Time passes, the sun 
ripens them, they become as sweet as honey, and then they're called grapes. We 
trample on them; we extract the juice and put it into casks; it ferments on its own, we 
open it on the feast-day of St. John-the-Drinker*, it's become wine! It's a miracle! You 
drink the red juice and, lo and behold, your soul grows big, too big for the old carcass, 
it challenges God to a fight. Now tell me, boss, how does it happen?' 
I did not answer. I felt, as I listened to Zorba, that the world was recovering its pristine 
freshness. All the dulled daily things regained the brightness they had in the begin- 
ning, when we came out of the hands of God. Water, women, the stars, bread, 
returned to their mysterious, primitive origin and the divine whirlwind burst once more 
upon the air. 



That is why, every evening, lying on the pebbles, I impatiently waited for Zorba. I 

would see him suddenly emerge out of the bowels of the earth and approach with his 

loose-knit body and long striding step. From afar I could see 

* The feast of Klydonas, held on the 15th August. It can be compared to Hallowe'en. 

56 

how the work had fared that day, by his bearing, by the way he held his head high or 
low, by the swing of his arms. 

At first I also went with him. I watched the men. I endeavoured to lead a different type 

of life, to interest myself in practical work, to know and love the human material which 

had fallen into my hands, to feel the long-wished-for joy of no longer having to deal 

with words but with living men. And I made romantic plans - if the extraction of lignite 

was successful - to organise a sort of community in which everything should be 

shared, where we should eat the same food together and wear the same clothes, like 

brothers. I created in my mind a new religious order, the leaven of a new life... 

But I had not yet made up my mind to acquaint Zorba with my project. He was irritated 

by my comings and goings amongst the workmen, questioning, interfering and always 

taking the workman's part. 

Zorba would purse his lips and say: 

'Boss, aren't you going for a stroll outside? The sun and the sea, you know!' 
At first I insisted, and would not go. I asked questions, gossiped, and got to know 
every man's history - how many children they had to feed, sisters to be married, 
helpless old relations; their cares, illnesses and worries. 

'Don't delve like that into their histories, boss,' Zorba would say, scowling. 'You'll be 
taken in, with your soft heart, and you'll like them more than's good for them or for our 
work. Whatever they do, you'll find excuses for them. Then, heaven help us, they'll 
scamp their work, do it any old how. Heaven help them, too, you'd better realise that. 
When the boss is hard, the men respect him, they work. When the boss is soft, they 
leave it all to him, and have an easy time, Get me?' 

Another evening, after work, he threw his pick down in the shed and shouted, out of all 
patience: 

'Look here, boss, do stop meddling. As fast as I build, you destroy. Now what are all 

those things you were telling them 

57 

tell you that? I don't believe in anything or any one; only in Zorba. Not because Zorba 
is better than the others; not at all, not a little bit! He's a brute like the rest! But I 
believe in Zorba because he's the only being I have in my power, the only one I know. 
All the rest are ghosts. I see with these eyes, I hear with these ears, I digest with 
these guts. All the rest are ghosts, I tell you. When I die, everything'll die. The whole 
Zorbatic world will go to the bottom!' 'What egoism!' I said sarcastically. 
'I can't help it, boss! That's how it is. I eat beans, I talk beans; I am Zorba, I talk like 
Zorba.' 

I said nothing. Zorba's words stung me like whiplashes. I admired him for being so 
strong, for despising men to that extent, and at the same time wanting to live and work 
with them. I should either have become an ascetic or else have adorned men with 
false feathers so that I could put up with them. 

Zorba looked round at me. By the light of the stars I could see he was grinning from 
ear to ear. 

'Have I offended you, boss?' he said, stopping abruptly. We had arrived at the hut. 
Zorba looked at me tenderly and uneasily. 

I did not reply. I felt my mind was in agreement with Zorba, but my heart resisted, 
wanted to leap out and escape from the brute, to go its own road. 
T'm not sleepy this evening, Zorba,' I said. 'You go to bed.' The stars were shining, the 
sea was sighing and licking the shells, a glow-worm lit under its belly its little erotic 
lantern. Night's hair was streaming with dew. 



I lay face downward, plunged in silence, thinking of nothing. I was now one with night 
and the sea; my mind was like a glowworm that had lit its little lantern and settled on 
the damp, dark earth, and was waiting. 

The stars were travelling round, the hours were passing -and, when I arose, I had, 
without knowing how, engraved on my mind the double task I had to accomplish on 
this shore: 
60 

Escape from Buddha, rid myself by words of all my metaphysical cares and free my 
mind from vain anxiety; 

Make direct and firm contact with men, starting from this very moment. 
I said to myself: 'Perhaps it is not yet too late.' 

't tncle anagnosti, the grandfather, greets you and LJ asks if you would care to come 
to his house for a meal. The gelder will be coming to the village today to castrate the 
pigs. It's an occasion, and the "parts" are a real delicacy. Kyria Maroulia, the gaffer's 
wife, will cook them specially for you. It's also their grandson Minas's birthday today, 
and you'll be able to wish him many happy returns.' 

It is a great pleasure to enter a Cretan peasant's home. Everything about you is 
patriarchal: the hearth, the oil-lamp, the earthenware jars lining the wall, a few chairs, 
a table and, on the left as you enter, in a hole in the wall, a pitcher of fresh water. 
From the beams hang strings of quinces, pomegranates and aromatic plants: sage, 
mint, red-peppers, rosemary and savory. 

At the far end of the room a ladder or a few wooden steps lead up to the raised 
platform, where there is a trestle-bed and, above it, the holy icons with their lamps. 
The house appears empty, but it contains everything needful, so few in reality are the 
true necessities of man. 

It was a magnificent day, rendered very mild by the autumn sun. We sat in front of the 

house in the little peasant garden, under an olive tree laden with fruit. Between the 

silvery leaves the sea could be seen gleaming in the distance, perfectly calm and still. 

Vaporous clouds were continually passing in front of the sun and making the earth 

appear now sad, now gay, as if it were breathing. 

At the end of the tiny garden, in an enclosure, the castrated 

61 

pig was squealing with pain and deafening us. The smell of Kyria Maroulia's cooking 
on the embers in the hearth reached our nostrils. 

Our conversation was confined to the everlasting topics: the corn crops, the vines, the 
rain. We were obliged to shout because the old gaffer was hard of hearing. He said he 
had 'a proud ear'. This old Cretan's life had been straightforward and peaceful, like 
that of a tree in a sheltered ravine. He had been born, had grown up and had married. 
He had had children and had had time to see his grandchildren. Several had died, but 
others were living: the continuation of the family was assured. 
This old Cretan could recall the old days, Turkish rule, the sayings of his father, the 
miracles which happened in those days because the women-folk feared God and had 
faith. 

'Why, look at me here, old uncle Anagnosti who's speaking to you! My own birth was a 
miracle. Aye, upon my soul, a miracle! And when I tell you how it happened, you'll be 
amazed. "The Lord have mercy on us," you'll say, and go to the monastery of the 
Virgin Mary and burn a candle to her.' 

He crossed himself and, in a soft voice and gentle manner, began to tell his tale. 
Tn those days, then, a rich Turkish woman lived in our village - damn her soul! One 
fine day the wretch became big with child and the time came for her to give birth. They 
laid her on the trestle-bed and she stayed there bellowing like a heifer for three days 
and nights. But the child wouldn't come. So a friend of hers - damn her soul, too! - 
gave her some advice. "Tzafer Hanum, you should call Mother Mary for help!" That's 
how the Turks call the Virgin. Great be her power! "What for?" that Tzafer bitch 



bellowed. "Call her! I'd sooner die!" But her pains became more acute. Another day 
and night went by. She was still bellowing, and still she couldn't deliver the child. What 
could be done? She couldn't bear the pains any longer. So she started to shout for all 
she was worth: "Mother Mary! Mother Mary!" But it was no use, 
62 

the pains wouldn't stop and the child wouldn't come. And her friend said: "Perhaps she 
can't understand Turkish!" So that bitch yelled: "Virgin of the Roumis! Virgin of the 
Rou-mis!"* Roumis be damned! The pains increased. "You're not calling her the 
proper way," said the friend. "You're not calling her the proper way, and that's why she 
won't come." So that heathen bitch, seeing her peril, cries out fit to burst her lungs: 
"Holy Virgin!" And straight away the child slipped out of her womb like an eel out of the 
mud. 

'That happened one Sunday, and the next Sunday my mother had her pains. She 
went through it, too, the poor wretch. She was really going through it, my poor mother 
was, and she screamed: "Holy Virgin! Holy Virgin!" But she wasn't delivered. My father 
was sitting on the ground in the middle of the yard. He couldn't eat or drink because of 
her sufferings. He wasn't at all pleased with the Holy Virgin. You see, the last time 
when that Tzafer bitch had called her, the Virgin had broken her neck to come and 
deliver her. But now ... When the fourth day came, my father couldn't contain himself 
any longer. Without a moment's hesitation he takes his pitchfork and goes to the 
monastery of the Martyred Virgin. May she succour us! He gets there, goes in the 
church without even crossing himself, so great was his rage, he shuts and bolts the 
door behind him, and marches straight up to the icon. "Look here, Holy Virgin," he 
shouts, "here's my wife, Krinio -you know her, don't you - you ought to, she brings you 
oil every Saturday, and she lights your lamps - here's my wife been having her pains 
for three days and nights and she's been calling you. Can't you hear her? You must 
be deaf if you can't! Of course if she were some Tzafer bitch, one of those Turkish 
sluts, you'd go and break your neck for her. But my wife, Krinio, she's only a Christian, 
so you've become deaf and can't hear her! You know, if you weren't 
* Muslim name for Christians or Infidels, from Roman, 
the Holy Virgin, I'd teach you a lesson with the handle of this pitchfork here!" 
'And, without more ado, without so much as bowing his head to her, he turned his 
back on her and was about to leave. But, great is the Lord, just then the icon made a 
loud grating noise as if it were splitting. Let me tell you if you don't know it already, 
icons make a noise like that when they're doing miracles. My father understood at 
once. He wheeled round again, knelt down and crossed himself. "I've sinned against 
you, Holy Virgin," he cried. "I've said a lot of things I shouldn't, but let's forget it!" 
'He had hardly got back to the village when he heard the good news. 
'"Long life to him, Kostandi. Your wife has given birth to a son!" It was me, old 
Anagnosti here. But I was born with a weak ear. You see, my father had blasphemed, 
he'd called the Virgin deaf. 

'"Oh, that's how it is, is it?" the Virgin must have said. "Well, just you wait, I'll make 
your son deaf, that'll teach you to blaspheme!'" 

And uncle Anagnosti crossed himself. 'But that's nothing,' he said. 'God be praised! 
She might have made me blind or an idiot, or hunchbacked, or even -God Almighty 
preserve us! - she might have made me a girl. This is just nothing at all, I bow to her 
holiness!' He filled the glasses. 

'Long may she help us!' he said, raising his glass. To your health, uncle Anagnosti. I 

hope you live to a hundred and see your great-great-grandchildren!' 

The old man tossed off his wine in one go and wiped his moustache. 

'No, my son,' he said. 'That's too much to ask. I've seen my grandchildren. That's 

enough. Mustn't ask too much. My hour has come. I am old, my friends, my loins are 

empty, I can't - much as I'd like to -1 can't sow the seed for any more children. So 

what'd I be doing with life?' 



64 

He filled the glasses again, pulled out from his waistband some walnuts and dried figs 
wrapped in laurel leaves and shared them with us. 

T have given everything I had to my children/ he said. 'We've become poverty- 
stricken, yes, poverty-stricken, but I don't complain. God has all that is needful!' 
'God may have all that's needful, uncle Anagnosti,' Zorba shouted in the old man's 
ear. 'God may have, but not us. The old skinflint gives us nothing!' 
But the old villager frowned. 

'Don't say that!' he chided severely. 'Don't upbraid him! The poor fellow counts on us, 
too, you know!' 

At this moment grandmother Anagnosti entered silently and submissively carrying the 
celebrated delicacy on an earthenware dish, and also a large jug full of wine. She set 
them on the table and remained standing with hands clasped and lowered eyes. 
I felt some repugnance at having to taste these hors-d'oeuvre, but, on the other hand, 
I did not have the courage to refuse. Zorba was watching me out of the corner of his 
eye and enjoying my discomfiture. 

'It's the most tasty dish you could wish for, boss/ he affirmed. 'Don't be squeamish.' 
Old Anagnosti gave a little laugh. 

'That's the truth, indeed it is, you try them and see. They melt in the mouth! When 
Prince George - may the hour be blessed for him! - visited our monastery up there in 
the mountains, the monks prepared a royal feast in his honour, and they served meat 
to every one save to the prince, who was given a plateful of soup. The prince took his 
spoon and began to stir his soup. "What are these? Beans?" he asked in surprise. 
"White haricot beans, are they?" "Try them, Your Highness," said the old abbot. "Try 
them and we'll talk about them afterwards." The prince took a spoonful, two, three, he 
emptied his plate and licked his lips. "What is this wonderful dish?" he said, 
65 

"What tasty beans! They're as nice as brains!" "They're no beans, your Highness," 
replied the abbot, laughing. "They're no beans! We've had all the cocks of the neigh- 
bourhood castrated!'" 

Roaring with laughter, the old man stuck his fork into another morsel. 
'A dish fit for princes!' he said. 'Open your mouth.' 
I opened my mouth and he popped in the morsel. 

He filled the glasses again and we drank to the health of his grandson. Old 
Anagnosti's eyes shone. 

'What would you like your grandson to be, uncle Anagnosti?' I asked. 'Tell us, so that 
we can wish.' 

'What could I wish, my son? Well, that he takes the right road; that he becomes a 
good man, head of a family; that he, too, gets married and has children and 
grandchildren. And may one of his children be like me, so that old folk exclaim: "I say, 
doesn't he look like old Anagnosti - God sanctify his soul! - he was a good man!'" 
'Maroulia!' he called, without looking at his wife. 'Maroulia, more wine, fill up the jug 
again!' 

Just then the wicket-gate to the enclosure yielded to a powerful thrust from the pig and 

the pig rushed grunting into the garden. 

'It hurts him, poor beast,' Zorba said pityingly. 

'Of course it hurts him!' the old Cretan said, laughing. 'Supposing they did that to you, 
wouldn't it hurt you?' 
Zorba fidgeted on his chair. 

'May your tongue be cut out, you old deaf-post!' Zorba muttered in horror. 
The pig ran about in front of us, looking at us furiously. 

'I do believe he knows we're eating them!' said uncle Anagnosti, who had been put in 
high spirits by the drop of wine he had drunk. 

But we, like cannibals, went on quietly and contentedly eating the delicacy and 



drinking the red wine, as we gazed 
66 

between the silvery branches of the olive tree towards the sea, which the sunset had 
turned pink. 

At dusk we left the old man's house. Zorba, who was now also in high spirits, wanted 
to talk. 

'What were we saying the day before yesterday, boss? You were saying you wanted 
to open the people's eyes. All right, you just go and open old uncle Anagnosti's eyes 
for him! You saw how his wife had to behave before him, waiting for his orders, like a 
dog begging. Just go now and teach them that women have equal rights with men, 
and that it's cruel to eat a piece of the pig while the pig's still raw and groaning in front 
of you, and that it's simple lunacy to give thanks to God because he's got everything 
while you're starving to death! What good'll that poor devil Anagnosti get out of all your 
explanatory humbug? You'd only cause him a lot of bother. And what'd old mother 
Anagnosti get out of it? The fat would be in the fire: family rows would start, the hen 
would want to be cock, the couple would just have a good set-to and make their 
feathers fly ... ! Let people be, boss; don't open their eyes. And supposing you did, 
what'd they see? Their misery! Leave their eyes closed, boss, and let them go on 
dreaming!' 

He was silent a moment and scratched his head. He was thinking. 
'Unless/ he said at last, 'unless 
'Unless what? Let's have it!' 

'Unless when they open their eyes you can show them a better world than the 
darkness in which they're gallivanting at present... Can you?' 
I did not know. I was fully aware of what would be destroyed. I did not know what 
would be built out of the ruins. No one can know that with any degree of certainty, I 
thought. The old world is tangible, solid, we live in it and are struggling with it every 
moment - it exists. The world of the future is not yet born, it is elusive, fluid, made of 
the light from 
67 

which dreams are woven; it is a cloud buffeted by violent winds - love, hate, 
imagination, luck, God ... The greatest prophet on earth can give men no more than a 
watchword, and the vaguer the watchword the greater the prophet. Zorba looked at 
me with a mocking smile which vexed me. 'I can show them a better world!' I replied. 
'Can you? Well, let's hear about it!' 'I can't explain it; you wouldn't understand.' "That 
means you haven't got one to show!' Zorba rejoined, shaking his head. 'Don't take me 
for a simpleton, boss. If anyone's told you I'm a moon-calf, they're wrong. I may have 
no more education than old uncle Anagnosti, but I'm nowhere near so stupid! Well, if I 
can't understand, what d'you expect of that poor fellow and his blockheaded mate? 
And what about all the other Anagnostides in the world? Have you only got more 
darkness to show them? They've managed pretty well up to now; they have children, 
and even grandchildren. God makes them deaf or blind, and they say: "God be 
praised!" They feel at home in their misery. So let them be and say nothing.' 
I was silent. We were passing the widow's garden. Zorba stopped a moment and 
sighed, but said nothing. A shower must have fallen. There was a fresh earthy smell in 
the air. The first stars appeared. The new moon was shining, it was a tender shade of 
greenish-yellow. The sky was overflowing with sweetness. 

That man has not been to school, I thought, and his brains have not been perverted. 
He has had all manner of experiences; his mind is open and his heart has grown 
bigger, without his losing one ounce of his primitive boldness. All the problems which 
we find so complicated or insoluble he cuts through as if with a sword, like Alexander 
the Great cutting the Gordian knot. It is difficult for him to miss his aim, because his 
two feet are held firmly planted on the ground by the weight of his whole body. African 
savages worship the serpent because its whole body touches the ground and it 



68 

must, therefore, know all the earth's secrets. It knows them with its belly, with its tail, 
with its head. It is always in contact or mingled with the Mother. The same is true of 
Zorba. We educated people are just empty-headed birds of the air. 
The stars were multiplying in the heavens, and they were all hard, fierce, scornful and 
pitiless towards man. 

We no longer spoke. We were both gazing with terror at the sky. Every second new 
stars lit up in the east and spread the conflagration. 

We arrived at our hut. I had not the slightest desire to eat, and sat on a rock by the 
sea. Zorba lit the fire, ate, was about to come to sit beside me, but changed his mind 
and lay on his mattress and fell asleep. 

The sea was dead calm. Beneath the volley of shooting stars the earth also lay 
motionless and silent. No dog barked, no nightbird shrieked. It was a stealthy, 
dangerous, total silence, composed of thousands of cries so distant or from such 
depths within us that we could not hear them. I could only discern the pulsing of my 
blood in my temples and in the veins of my neck. 
The song of the tiger! I thought, and shuddered. 

In India, when night falls, a sad, monotonous song is sung in a low voice, a slow, wild 

song, like the distant yawn of a beast of prey - the song of the tiger. Man's heart 

flutters and seeks an outlet as he waits in tense expectation. 

As I thought of this fearful song the void in my breast was gradually filled. My ears 

came to life, the silence became a shout. It was as if the soul itself were composed 

out of this song and were escaping from the body to listen. 

I stooped, filled my palm with seawater, moistened my brow and temples. I felt 

refreshed. In the depths of my being, cries were echoing, threateningly, confused, 

impatient - the tiger was within me and he was roaring. 

All at once I heard the voice clearly. It was the voice of Buddha. 

I started walking rapidly along the water's edge, as if I 

69 

wished to escape. For some time now, when alone at night and silence reigned, I had 
been hearing his voice - at first sorrowful and plaintive, like a dirge; then, becoming 
angry, scolding and imperative. It kicked within my breast like a child when the time 
has come for it to leave the womb. 

It must have been midnight. Black clouds had gathered in the sky, large drops of rain 
fell on to my hands. But I paid no heed. I was plunged into a burning atmosphere; I 
could feel a flame flickering from both my temples. 

The time has come, I thought, with a shudder. The Buddhist wheel is bearing me 
away; the time has come for me to free myself from this miraculous burden. 
I returned swiftly to the hut and lit the lamp. When the light fell on Zorba, his eyelids 
twitched, he opened his eyes and watched me bending over the paper and writing. He 
growled something which I did not catch, turned brusquely towards the wall and fell 
fast asleep once more. 

I wrote quickly, I was in a hurry. Buddha was completely ready within me and I could 
see it issuing from my brain like a blue ribbon covered with symbols. It was coming 
forth rapidly, and I tried desperately to keep up with it. I wrote; everything had become 
simple, very simple. I was not writing, I was copying. A whole world was appearing 
before me, composed of compassion, renunciation and air: Buddha's mansions, the 
women in the harem, the golden coach, the three fateful encounters - with the old 
man, with the sick man, with death; the flight, the ascetic life, the deliverance, the 
proclaiming of salvation. The earth was covered with yellow flowers; beggars and 
kings donned saffron robes; the stones, the trees and the flesh became lighter. Souls 
became vapour, the vapour became spirit, and the spirit became nothing ... My fingers 
were beginning to ache, but I would not, I could not stop. The vision was passing 
swiftly and vanishing; I had to keep up with it. 



In the morning Zorba found me asleep, with my head on the manuscript. 

70 