BOOK: Zorba the Greek by Nikos Kazantzakis

CHAPTER XI 

I rose as happy as if I had received my New Year presents. The wind was cold, the sky 
clear, the sea gleaming. 

I took the path to the village. Mass would have ended by now. As I walked along, I 
wondered, with an absurd emotion, who would be the first person - lucky or unlucky - 1 
should meet this new year. If only, I said to myself, it could be a small child with its 
arms loaded with its New Year toys; or an active old man in a white shirt with full, 
embroidered sleeves, content and proud that he had fulfilled his duty on earth with 
courage. The further I went and the closer I came to the village the more troubled I 
became. 

Suddenly my knees gave way beneath me. Under the olive trees, walking with a 
springing step along the village road, appeared in red, with a black kerchief over her 
head, the graceful, slender-waisted figure of the widow! 

Her sinuous gait was really that of a black panther, and it seemed to me that an acrid 
scent of musk was distilled in the air. If only I could escape! I felt that when angry this 



beast would have no mercy and that the only thing to do was to run away. But how? 
The widow was steadily approaching. The gravel seemed to be crunching as if an 
army were marching over it. She saw me, shook her head, her kerchief slipped down 
and her hair appeared, black as jet and shining. She cast me a languorous look and 
smiled. Her eyes had a wild sweetness. Hastily she adjusted her kerchief, as though 
she were ashamed at having let me see one of woman's deepest secrets: her hair. 
I wanted to speak to her, wish her a happy New Year, but my throat was too tight, as 
on the day when the gallery fell in and my life had been in danger. The reeds 
surrounding her 
133 

garden stirred in the wind, the winter sun fell on the golden lemons and the oranges 

with their dark foliage. The entire garden was resplendent like a paradise. 

The widow stopped, stretched out her arm and thrust the gate open. I was passing her 

just at that moment. She looked round and, raising her eyebrows, turned her gaze on 

me. 

She left the gate open and I saw her disappear behind the orange trees, swaying her 
hips as she went. 

To enter that gate and bolt it, to run after her, take her by the waist and, without a 

word, drag her to her large widow's bed, that was what you would call being a man! 

That was what my grandfather would have done, and what I hope my grandson will 

do! But I stood there like a post, weighing things up and reflecting ... 

'In another life/ 1 murmured, smiling bitterly, 'in some other life I'll behave better than 

this!' 

I plunged into the green defile, feeling a weight on my soul as if I had committed a 
mortal sin. I wandered up and down. It was cold and I was shivering. It was no use my 
chasing from my thoughts the widow's swaying hips, her smile, her eyes, her breasts, 
they always returned -1 was suffocating. 

The trees had no leaves as yet, but the buds were full of sap and already swelling and 
bursting. In every bud you could feel the concentrated presence of young shoots, 
flowers, fruits-to-be, lying in wait and ready to burst out to the light. Day and night in 
the middle of winter, the great miracle of spring was silently, secretly being prepared 
beneath the dry bark. 

Suddenly I gave a cry of joy. A bold almond tree opposite me in a sheltered hollow 
had burst into flower in mid-winter, leading the way to all the other trees and heralding 
the spring. 

The oppression I felt left me. I took a deep breath of its somewhat peppery scent. I left 
the road and sat down beneath its flowering branches. 
I stayed there a long time, thinking of nothing, care-free 
134 

and happy. This was eternity and I was sitting beneath a tree in Paradise. 
Suddenly a loud rough voice ejected me from this paradise. 

'Now what might you be doing nicked away in there, boss? I've been looking high and 

low for you. It's close on twelve, come on!' 

'Where?' 

'Where? You ask me where? To old mother Sucking-pig, of course! Aren't you 
hungry? The sucking-pig's out of the oven! What a smell... makes your mouth water! 
Come on!' 

I rose, stroked the hard trunk of the almond tree containing so many mysteries and 
which had produced this miracle of blossom. Zorba went on ahead, light-footed, full of 
zest and hunger. The fundamental needs of man - food, drink, women and dance - 
were never exhausted or dulled in his robust and eager body. 
He was holding in his hand a flat parcel wrapped in pink paper and tied with golden- 
coloured string. 

'A New Year's gift?' I asked with a smile. 



Zorba laughed, trying to hide his emotion. 

'Well, just so she's no room for complaint, poor woman!' he said, without turning 
round. 'So she'll remember her past grandeur ... She's a woman - haven't we said so 
often enough? - and therefore a creature always mourning over her lot...' 
'A photograph?' 

'You'll see ... you'll see; don't be in so great a hurry! I made it myself. Come on, we'd 
better get a move on.' 

The midday sun was such as to gladden your very bones. The sea, too, was happily 

warming itself in the sun. In the distance the tiny uninhabited island, shrouded in light 

mist, looked as if it had raised itself out of the sea and was floating. 

We approached the village, and Zorba came close to me and lowered his voice. 

'You know, boss,' he said, 'the person in question was at 

135 

church. I was standing in front by the cantor when I suddenly saw the sacred icons 
light up. Christ, the Holy Virgin, the Twelve Apostles, everything shone ... 'Whatever's 
happening?' I said, crossing myself. 'Is it the sun?' I turned round - it was the widow!' 
'All right, Zorba. That'll do,' I said, hurrying on. 
But Zorba ran after me. 

'I saw her close to, boss. She's got a beauty spot on her cheek that's enough to send 
you crazy. Another of those mysteries - beauty spots on women's cheeks!' 
He opened wide his eyes with an air of stupefaction. 

'Have you noticed, boss? The skin's all soft and smooth, and then, all of a sudden, a 

black spot! Well, that's all that's needed! It sends you crazy! D'you understand that, 

boss? What d'your books say about it?' 

'The devil take them!' 

Zorba laughed, pleased with himself. 

"That's the stuff!' he exclaimed. 'That's the sniff. You're beginning to realise ...' 
We did not stop at the cafe; we pressed on. 

Our good lady had cooked a sucking-pig for us in the oven and was waiting for us on 
her doorstep. 

She had put a canary-yellow ribbon round her neck once more, and, to see her like 
that - heavily powdered, lips plastered with a thick layer of crimson - was enough to 
dismay any one. Was she, in fact, a ship's figurehead? As soon as she caught sight of 
us her whole flesh seemed to be gladdened and set in motion, her small eyes danced 
naughtily in her head and came to rest fixed on Zorba's curled-up moustache. 
As soon as the outer door had closed behind us, Zorba took her by the waist. 
'Happy New Year, my Bouboulina!' he said. 'Look what I've brought you!' And he 
kissed her plump and wrinkled neck. 

The old siren was tickled for a moment, but did not lose her head. Her eyes were 

clamped on the present. She seized 

136 

it, undid the golden string, looked inside and uttered a cry of joy. 
I leaned forward to see what it was: on a thick piece of cardboard that rascal Zorba 
had drawn in four colours - red, gold, grey and black - four huge battleships, decked 
with flags, sailing on an indigo-blue sea. In front of the battleships, floating on the 
waves, all naked and white, with hair flowing, breasts in the air, and a spiral fish-tail, 
was a siren -Dame Hortense, complete with yellow ribbon round her neck! She was 
holding four strings and pulling behind her the four battleships flying the flags of 
England, Russia, France and Italy. In each corner of the picture hung a beard, one 
fair, one red, one grey, and one black. 
The old singer understood immediately. 
'Me!' she said, pointing proudly to the siren. 
She sighed. 

'Ah! I used to be a Great Power, too, once upon a time!' 



She moved a small round mirror from over her bed, near to the parrot's cage, and, in 
its place, hung Zorba's picture. Beneath her thick make-up she must have gone pale. 
Zorba, meanwhile, had slipped into the kitchen. He was hungry. He brought in the dish 
with the sucking-pig, placed a bottle of wine on the table in front of him and filled three 
glasses. 

'Come! Eat, eat!' he cried, clapping his hands together. 'Let's begin with the foundation 
- the belly. After that, my sweet, we'll take care of what's below!' 
But the atmosphere was troubled by the old siren's sighs. Each New Year, she, too, 
had a little Doomsday of her own ... she looked back on her life, weighed it up and 
found it wanting. Beneath this old woman's thinning hair, big cities, men, silk dresses, 
bottles of champagne and scented beards rose from the graves of her memory on all 
solemn occasions. 

T've no appetite,' she murmured coyly. 'None at all ... none at all...' 

She kneeled down before the brazier and poked the hot 

137 

coals. Her flabby cheeks reflected the light of the fire. A lock of hair slipped from her 
brow and was singed by a flame. The nauseating smell of burnt hair permeated the 
room. 

'I won't eat... I won't eat... ' she muttered once more, seeing we were taking no notice 
of her at all. 

Zorba clenched his fists impatiently. He remained for a moment undecided. He could 
let her mutter to herself as much as she chose, while we got on with the roast pig - or 
he could throw himself on his knees, take her in his arms and calm her down with kind 
words. I watched his tanned face and saw, passing over his mobile features, waves of 
contradictory impulses. 

Suddenly his expression set. He had come to a decision. He knelt beside her and 
seized the siren's knees. 

'If you don't eat, my little charmer,' he said in heartrending tones, 'it's the end of 
everything. Have pity on the poor pig, my lovely, and eat this sweet, little trotter!' And 
he pushed into her mouth the crackling trotter covered with butter. 
He took her in his arms, raised her from the ground, and placed her gently on her 
chair between the two of us. 

'Eat,' he said, 'eat, my treasure, so that Saint Basil will come to our village! If you don't, 
you know, he won't come to us! He'll go back to his own country, to Caesarea. He'll 
pick up the ink-horn and paper, the Twelfth Cake, the New Year gifts, the children's 
toys, even this little sucking-pig, and away with them all! So open your little mouth my 
Bouboulina and eat!' 

He put out two fingers and tickled her under the arm. The old siren clucked with 
pleasure, wiped her small, reddened eyes and started busily to chew over the crackly 
trotter ... 

Just at that moment two amorous cats began to howl on the roof over our heads. 
They howled in an indescribable tone of hatred, their voices rising and falling, 
threateningly. Suddenly we heard them scrambling wildly on the roof tearing one 
another to pieces ... 
138 

'Miaow ... miaow ... ' said Zorba, winking at the old siren. 

She smiled and pressed his hand under the table. Her throat relaxed and she began 
to eat with appetite. 

The sun moved round, came in through the small window and shone on the good 
lady's feet. The bottle was empty, Zorba had twisted up his moustaches like those of a 
wild cat and moved closer to the 'female of the species'. Dame Hortense, huddled up, 
her head sunk into her shoulders, shuddered as she felt his warm, vinous breath on 
her. 

'Now, what's this other mystery, boss?' said Zorba, looking round at me. 'Everything 



goes backwards with me. When I was a kid, so it seems, I looked like a little old man. I 
was dense, didn't talk much but had a big fellow's voice. They say I was like my 
grandad! But the older I grew, the more harum-scarum I became. I began doing wild 
things when I was twenty. Oh, nothing special, just the same as other fellows at that 
age. When I was forty I began to feel really young and went off on the maddest 
escapades. And now I'm over sixty - sixty-five, boss, but keep that dark -well, now I'm 
over sixty, how can I explain? Honestly, the world's grown too small for me!' 
He raised his glass and turned with compunction to his lady. 

'Your good health, Bouboulina,' he said solemnly. 'May God see to it that this year you 
grow some teeth and some neat eyebrows, and a new skin scented like a peach! And 
that you do away with all these beastly little ribbons! And that there's another 
revolution in Crete and the four Great Powers come back again, Bouboulina, my dear, 
with their fleets ... and that each fleet has its admiral and each admiral his curled and 
scented beard. And may you rise from the waves once more, my siren, singing your 
lovely song. And may the fleets break to pieces on these two round and savage 
rocks!' 
139 

Whereupon he placed his big hands on the good lady's flabby, hanging breasts ... 
Zorba was getting lively again, his voice was hoarse with desire. I laughed. One day, 
at the cinema, I had seen a Turkish pasha frolicking in a Paris cabaret. He was 
holding a fair-haired young midinette on his lap. The pasha was getting excited, the 
tassel on his fez began to rise slowly, stopped for a moment when it was horizontal, 
then suddenly stuck straight up in the air. 
'What are you laughing at, boss?' Zorba asked. 

The good lady, however, was still thinking of what Zorba had been saying. 

'Oh,' she said, 'd'you think it's possible, Zorba? But when youth goes it never comes 

back....' 

Zorba moved closer still; the two chairs stuck together. 

'Listen to me, ducky,' he said, trying at the same time to undo the third, the decisive 
button of her bodice. 'Listen, let me tell you about the fine present I'm going to get you. 
There's a new doctor who performs miracles, they say. He gives you a medicine of 
some kind - drops or powder, I don't know which - and you become twenty again in a 
trice -twenty-five at the worst! Don't cry, my dear, I'll have some sent from Europe for 
you ...' 

The old siren started. Her reddish scalp was gleaming between the thinning hair. She 
threw her fat, fleshy arms round Zorba's neck. 

'If it's drops, my sweetie,' she murmured, rubbing herself against Zorba like a cat, 
'you'll order a demijohn for me, won't you? And if it's powder 
'A sackful!' said Zorba, undoing the third button. 

The cats, who had been quiet for a time, started their howling again. One of the voices 

was plaintive and appealing, the other angry and threatening. 

Our good lady yawned and her eyes became languorous. 

'D'you hear those horrid cats?' she muttered. 'They've no shame!' And she sat on 

Zorba's knee. She leaned her head 

back against his neck and heaved a great sigh. She had drunk a little too much and 
her eyes were growing misty. 

'What are you thinking about, my Bouboulina?' Zorba asked, clutching hold of her 
breasts. 

'Alexandria ... ' murmured the old siren, who had trundled about the world quite a bit. 
'Alexandria ... Beirut... Constantinople ... the Turks, the Arabs, sherbet, golden 
sandals, red fezes ...' 
She heaved another sigh. 

'When Ali Bey stayed the night with me - what a moustache, what eyebrows, what 



arms he had! - he'd call to the tambourine and flute players and throw them money 
through the window, so that they'd play in my courtyard until dawn. And the 
neighbours used to go green with envy: 'Ali Bey's there with her again!' they'd say in a 
rage. 

'Afterwards, in Constantinople, Suleiman Pasha would never let me go out at all on 
Fridays. He was afraid the Sultan might see me on the way to the mosque and be so 
dazzled by my beauty he'd have me kidnapped. Every morning when he left the house 
he'd put three big negroes at the door to keep all males away from me ... Ah! my little 
Suleiman!' 

She took a large check handkerchief from her bodice and bit it, hissing like a turtle. 
Zorba got rid of her by placing her on the chair next to him, and stood up, annoyed. 
He walked up and down once or twice and he began hissing as well; the room was 
suddenly too cramped for him. He picked up his stick and rushed out into the yard, 
and I saw him lean the ladder against the wall and clamber up, two steps at a time, in 
a fury. 

'Who are you going to thrash, Zorba?' I shouted. 'Suleiman Pasha?' 
"Those damned cats!' he shouted. 'Can't they leave us for a single moment?' 
And in one bound he was on the roof. 

140 
141 

Dame Hortense, quite drunk, her hair dishevelled, had now closed her inflamed eyes, 
and a discreet snore came from her toothless mouth. Sleep had lifted her up and 
transported her to the great cities of the East - into the closed gardens and dim 
harems of amorous pashas. Sleep let her pass through walls and sent her dreams. 
She could see herself fishing; she had thrown out four lines and caught four great 
battleships. 

Snoring and breathing heavily, the old siren smiled happily in her sleep, and 
seemingly refreshed by her bathe in the sea. 
Zorba came back, swinging his stick. 

'Sleeping, eh?' he said as he saw her. "The jade's asleep, is she?' 
'Yes, Zorba Pasha,' I answered, 'She's been carried off by the Doctor Voronoff who 
makes old people young again -sleep. She's only twenty, and she's strolling about 
Alexandria and Beirut 

'Let her go to the devil, the old slut!' Zorba growled, and spat on the floor. 'Just look at 
the way she's grinning! I wonder who she's grinning at, the brazen bitch? Come on, 
boss, let's go!' 

He slapped on his cap and opened the door. 

'She's not all on her own,' cried Zorba; 'she's with Suleiman Pasha. Can't you see? 
She's in her seventh heaven, the dirty cow!... Come on. Let's beat it!' 
We went out into the cold air. The moon was sailing across a calm sky. 
'Women!' said Zorba in disgust. 'Ugh! Still, it's not your fault, it's the fault of hare- 
brained harum-scarums like Suleiman and Zorba!' 
And after a moment's pause: 

'No, it's not even our fault/ he went on furiously. 'There's one being who's the cause of 
it all, and one alone - the Grand Hare-brained Harum-Scarum, the Grand Suleiman 
Pasha... you know who!' 
142 

'If he exists,' I answered. 'What if he doesn't?' 
'God Almighty, then we're done for!' 

For some time we strode along without a word. Zorba was certainly going over some 
wild ideas in his mind, because every second or so he would lash out at the pebbles 
with his stick and spit on the ground. 



Suddenly he turned to me. 

'May God sanctify my grandad's bones!' he said. 'He knew a thing or two about 
women. He liked them a lot, poor wretch, and they led him a regular dance in his 
lifetime. 'By all the good things I wish you, Alexis, my boy,' he'd say, "beware of 
women! When God took Adam's rib out to create woman - curse that minute! - the 
devil turned into a serpent, and pff! he snatched the rib and ran off with it ... God 
dashed after him and caught him, but he slipped out of his fingers and God was left 
with just the devil's horns in his hands. "A good housekeeper," said God, "can sew 
even with a spoon. Well, I'll create woman with the devil's horns!" And he did; and 
that's how the devil got us all, Alexis my boy. No matter where you touch a woman, 
you touch the devil's horns. Beware of her, my boy! She also stole the apples in the 
garden of Eden; she shoved them down her bodice, and now she goes out and about, 
strutting all over the place. A plague on her! Eat any of those apples and you're lost; 
don't eat any and you'll still be lost! What advice can I give you, then, my boy? Do as 
you please!' That's what my old grandad said to me. But how could you expect me to 
grow up sensible? I went the same way as he did -1 went to the devil!' 
We hurried through the village. The moonlight was disturbing. Imagine how it would be 
if you had been drinking and came out for a walk and found the world suddenly 
transformed. The roads had turned into rivers of milk, the holes in the road and the 
ruts overflowed with chalk, the hills were covered with snow. Your hands, face and 
neck were phosphorescent, like a glow-worm's tail. And the moon hung on your chest 
like an exotic round medal. 
143 

We were walking along briskly, in silence. Intoxicated by the moonlight as well as by 
the wine, we hardly felt our feet touch the ground. Behind us, in the sleeping village, 
the dogs had got up on the roofs and were howling at the moon. And we, for no 
reason at all, also felt a desire to stretch our necks towards the moon and begin to 
howl... 

We came to the widow's garden. Zorba stopped. Wine, good food and the moon had 
turned his head. He craned his neck and, in his big ass's voice, began to bray a 
bawdy couplet which, in his excited state, he composed on the spur of the moment. 
'She's another of the devil's horns!' he said. 'Let's go, boss!' 

Dawn was about to break when we arrived at the hut. I threw myself on my bed, worn 
out. Zorba washed, lit the stove and made some coffee. He crouched on the floor by 
the door, lit a cigarette and began to smoke placidly, his body straight and motionless 
as he looked out at the sea. His face was grave and thoughtful. He reminded me of a 
Japanese painting I like: an ascetic sitting on his crossed legs and wrapped in a long 
orange-coloured robe; his face shining like a carving in hard wood, blackened by the 
rain; his neck erect, smiling as he gazes, without fear, into the dark night... 
I looked at Zorba in the light of the moon and admired the jauntiness and simplicity 
with which he adapted himself to the world around him, the way his body and soul 
formed one harmonious whole, and all things - women, bread, water, meat, sleep - 
blended happily with his flesh and became Zorba. I had never seen such a friendly 
accord between a man and the universe. 

The moon would soon be setting now. It was round and of a pale green. An 
indescribable peacefulness spread across the sea. 

Zorba threw away his cigarette and reached out for a basket. He fumbled in it and 

pulled out some string, pulleys and 

144 

little pieces of wood; he lit the oil-lamp and once more started to experiment with his 
overhead railway. Stooping over his primitive toy, he began to make calculations 
which must have been extremely complicated and difficult, for every other second he 
scratched his head furiously and swore. 



Suddenly he had had enough of it. He aimed one kick at the model and it crashed to 

the ground. 
