BOOK: Zorba the Greek by Nikos Kazantzakis

CHAPTER XVIII 

I crossed the threshold of the chapel and plunged into the shadowy interior, which was 
cool and fragrant. 

The building was deserted. The bronze chandeliers shed a faint light. A finely worked 
iconostasis filled the far end of the chapel. It represented a golden vine-arbour laden 
with grapes. The walls were covered from top to bottom with half-obliterated frescoes: 
terrifying pictures of skeleton-like ascetics, the Fathers of the Church, Christ's 
prolonged Passion, huge fierce-looking angels with their hair tied in broad blue and 
pink ribbons which had faded with the damp. 

High up in the vault was the Virgin, with arms imploringly outstretched. A heavy silver 
lamp stood before her and the soft light flickered round her, caressing her long, con- 
torted face. I shall never forget her dolorous eyes, her puckered, rounded mouth and 
strong wilful chin. Here, I thought, is the completely happy and satisfied Mother, even 
in the most agonising pain, because she feels that from her mortal loins has issued 
something that will not die. 

When I recrossed the threshold the sun was sinking. I sat down under the orange tree 
in a state of happiness. The dome of the chapel was turning pink as though it were 
dawn. The monks had gone to their cells and were resting. They would not sleep at 
all; they had to muster all their strength. Christ would begin to climb Golgotha that 
night, and they had to go with him. Two black sows with pink teats were lying fast 
asleep beneath a carob tree. Pigeons were strutting on the roofs and cooing. 
How long, I thought, shall I live to enjoy the sweetness of the earth, the air, the silence 
and the scent of the orange tree in blossom? An icon of Saint Bacchus, which I had 
looked at 
214 

in the chapel, had made my heart overflow with happiness. The things that move me 
most deeply - unity, firmness of purpose and constancy of desire - were once again 
revealed to me. Blessed be that charming little icon of a Christian youth with curly hair 
falling over his forehead like bunches of grapes. Dionysus, the handsome god of wine 
and ecstasy, and Saint Bacchus fused in my mind and took on the same appearance. 
Under the vine-leaves and the monk's habit there quivered with life the same body, 
burnt by the sun -Greece. 
Zorba returned and hurriedly gave the news: 

'The abbot did come. We had a little talk; he needs a lot of coaxing; he says he's not 
going to give the forest away for a song; he's asking a lot more than we said, the old 
rogue, but I haven't finished with him yet/ 
'Why does he need coaxing? I thought we were agreed?' 

'Don't you meddle in this, for heaven's sake, boss,' Zorba pleaded. 'You'd only spoil 
things. There you are, after all this, talking about the old agreement; that's buried long 



ago. Don't frown; it's buried, I tell you. We'll have that forest at half-price!' 
'What mischief are you up to now, Zorba?' 

'Never you mind. That's my business. I'm going to oil the works and make them turn, 
do you get it?' 

'But why? I don't get it at all.' 

'Because I spent more than I should have done at Candia, that's why! Because Lola 
swallowed quite a heap of my -that is to say, your money. You don't think I've 
forgotten, do you? There is such a thing as self-respect. No blots on my copy-book! 
I've spent so much, so I pay so much. I've reckoned it up: Lola cost me seven 
thousand drachmas. I'll knock them off the price of the forest. It's the Abbot, the 
monastery and the Holy Virgin who'll pay for Lola. That's my scheme. How d'you like 
it?' 

'Not at all. Why should the Holy Virgin be responsible for your excesses?' 
215 

'She is responsible and more than responsible! Look, she had her son: God. God 
made me, Zorba, and he gave me some instruments - you know what I mean. And 
these damned instruments, no matter where I meet the female of the species, make 
me lose my head and open my purse. See? Therefore, Her Holiness is responsible 
and more than responsible. Let her pay.' 
'I don't like it, Zorba.' 

"That's another question altogether. Let's save the seven little banknotes first; we'll 
discuss it later! "Make love to me first, darling, I'll be your aunt again afterwards ..." 
You know how the song goes ...' 

The fat hospitaller appeared: 'Come inside,' he said, in a suave ecclesiastical tone; 
'dinner is served.' 

We went down to the refectory, a large hall with benches and long narrow tables. The 
smell of sour, rancid oil filled the air. At the far end was an old fresco of the Last 
Supper. The eleven faithful disciples crowded round Christ like a flock of sheep, and 
on the other side, standing quite alone, was the red-haired Judas, the black sheep. He 
had a bulging forehead and aquiline nose. And Christ could not take his eyes off him. 
The hospitaller sat down, placing me on his right and Zorba on his left. 
'We are fasting,' he said, 'so I hope you will excuse us - no oil or wine, even for 
visitors. But you are welcome!' 

We made the sign of the cross; then we served ourselves in silence to olives, spring 

onions, fresh beans and halva. We all three munched slowly, like rabbits. 

'Such is life here below,' said the hospitaller. 'A crucifixion and a fast. But patience, 

brothers, patience, the Resurrection and the Lamb are coming, and the Kingdom of 

Heaven.' 

I coughed. Zorba trod on my foot as though to say: 'Shut up!' 
'I've seen Father Zaharia ... ' said Zorba, to change the subject. 
216 

The hospitaller started: 

'What did that madman say to you?' he asked anxiously. 'He has all seven demons in 
him, don't listen to a word he says. His soul is impure and he sees impurity all around 
him.' 

The bell for the monks rang lugubriously. The hospitaller crossed himself and stood 
up. 

'I shall have to go/ he said. 'Christ's Passion is beginning; we must carry the cross 
with him. You can rest tonight, you must be tired after your journey. But at matins to- 
morrow 

"Those swine!' Zorba muttered between his teeth as soon as the monk had gone. 
'Swine! Liars! Mules!' 

'What's wrong, Zorba? Has Zaharia told you something?' 

'Never mind, boss, to hell with it! If they don't want to sign, I'll show them what I'm 



made of!' 

We went to the cell which had been assigned to us. In the corner was an icon 

representing the Virgin pressing her cheek against her son's, her big eyes full of tears. 

Zorba shook his big head. 

'Do you know why she's crying, boss?' 

'No.' 

'Because she can see what's going on. If I was a painter of icons, I'd draw the Virgin 
without eyes, ears or nose. Because I'd be sorry for her.' 

We stretched out on the hard beds. The wooden beams smelled of cypress; through 
the open window was wafted the gentle breath of spring, laden with the perfume of 
flowers. Occasionally the mournful tunes surged from the courtyard like gusts of wind. 
A nightingale began to sing close to the window, then another a short distance away, 
and still another. The night was overflowing with love. 

I could not sleep. The nightingale's song mingled with the lamentations of Christ, and I 
tried to climb Golgotha myself through the flowering orange trees, guiding myself by 
the huge spots of blood. In the blue spring night I could see the cold sweat glistening 
all over Christ's pale faltering body. I 
217 

could see his hands outstretched and trembling, as though he were a beggar 
imploring the bystanders to listen. The poor people of Galilee hurried after him, crying: 
'Hosannah! Hosannahl' They had palm-leaves in their hands and spread their mantles 
before his feet. He looked at the ones he loved, though none could divine the depths 
of his despair. He alone knew he was going to his death. Beneath the stars, weeping 
and silent, he consoled his poor human heart that was full of fear: 
'Like unto a grain of wheat, my heart, you, too, must fall into the ground and die. Be 
not afraid. If you do not, how can you bring forth fruit? How can you nourish men who 
die of hunger?' 

But, within him, his man's heart was fainting and trembling, and did not want to die ... 
The wood round the monastery was full of the song of nightingales. Their song rose 
amidst the damp foliage and spoke entirely of love and passion. And with it trembled, 
swelled and wept the poor heart of mankind. 

Gradually, imperceptibly, together with Christ's Passion and the nightingale's song, I 

entered the realm of sleep, just as the soul must enter Paradise. 

I had been sleeping less than hour when I awoke with a start, terror-stricken. 

'Zorba!' I cried. 'Did you hear? A revolver shot!' 

But Zorba was sitting on his bed smoking a cigarette. 

'Don't be alarmed, boss,' he said, still trying to control his anger, 'let them settle their 
own accounts, the swine!' 

Cries came from the corridor; we could hear heavy slippers dragging along, doors 
opening and closing, and a moaning in the distance as though someone were 
wounded. 

I leaped from my bed and opened the door. A wizened old man appeared before me 
and spread out his arms, barring my passage. He was wearing a white pointed bonnet 
and a white shirt down to his knees. 
218 

'Who are you?' 

'The bishop ...' he replied, his voice trembling. 

I almost burst out laughing. A bishop? Where were his ornaments, the gold chasuble, 
mitre and cross, the many-coloured false stones ... It was the first time I had seen a 
bishop in his night-attire. 
'What was that revolver shot, Your Lordship?' 

'I don't know, I don't know ... ' he stammered, pushing me gently back into the room. 
Zorba burst out laughing from his bed. 

'Are you scared, little Father?' he said. 'Come in, then, old fellow, and stay with us. We 



are no monks, so you needn't worry.' 

'Zorba,' I said in an undertone, 'show more respect, can't you? It's the bishop.' 
'H'm! in a shirt nobody's a bishop! Come in, old chap!' 

He stood up, took the bishop by the arm and led him into the cell, closing the door 
behind him. He took a bottle of rum out of his haversack and filled a small glass. 
'Drink, my friend,' he said. 'That'll buck you up.' 

The little old man drained the glass and soon came round. He sat down on my bed 
and leaned against the wall. 

'Very Reverend Father/ 1 said, 'what was that revolver shot?' 

'I don't know, my son ... I had worked till midnight and gone to bed, when next door in 
Father Demetrios's cell I heard ...' 

'Ah! ah!' said Zorba with a laugh. 'You were right, then, Zaharia! Those dirty swine!' 
The bishop bowed his head. 

'It must have been a thief of some sort,' he murmured. 

In the corridor the uproar had ceased and the monastery sank into silence once more. 
The bishop looked at me with his kind, frightened eyes, as if in supplication. 'Are you 
sleepy, my son?' he asked. 
219 

I felt clearly that he did not want to leave and go back to be alone in his cell. He was 
afraid. 

'No/ 1 answered, Tm not at all sleepy; stay here a while.' 

We began to talk. Zorba was leaning on his pillow and rolling a cigarette. 

'You appear to be a cultured young man/ the bishop said to me. 'Here I can't find 

anyone to talk to. I have three theories that help to make my life agreeable; I would 

like to tell you about them, my child.' 

He didn't wait for my reply but began straight away: 

'My first theory is this: the shape of flowers influences their colour; their colour 
influences their properties. Thus it is that each flower has a different effect on a man's 
body, and therefore on his soul. That is why we must be extremely careful in passing 
through a field when the flowers are in bloom.' 

He stopped as though waiting for my opinion. I could see the little old man wandering 
through a field, searching the ground, with secret excitement, for the shapes and 
colours of the flowers. The poor old man must tremble with mystic awe; in the spring 
the fields must be peopled for him with many-coloured devils and angels. 
"This is my second theory: every idea that has a real influence has also a real 
existence. It is really there, it does not float invisibly in the atmosphere - it has a real 
body - eyes, a mouth, feet, a stomach. It is male or female and therefore runs after 
men or women, as the case may be. That is why the Gospel says: "The Word became 
flesh..." 

He looked anxiously at me again. 

'My third theory/ he went on hurriedly, as he could not bear my silence, 'is this: there is 
some Eternity even in our ephemeral lives, only it is very difficult for us to discover it 
alone. Our daily cares lead us astray. A few people only, the flower of humanity, 
manage to live an eternity even in their transitory lives on this earth. Since all the 
others would therefore be lost, God had mercy on them and sent them religion - thus 
the crowd is able to live in eternity, too.' 
220 

He had finished and was visibly relieved for having spoken. He raised his small eyes, 
which had no lashes, and smiled at me. It was as though he were saying: "There, I am 
giving you all I have, take it!' I was very moved at the sight of this little old man thus 
offering me outright, when he hardly knew me, the fruits of a lifetime's work. 
He had tears in his eyes. 

'What do you think of my theories?' he asked, taking my hand between his own and 
looking into my eyes. I felt that he depended on my reply to tell him whether his life 



had been of any use or not. 

I knew that, over and above the truth, there exists another duty which is much more 

important and much more human. 

"Those theories may save many souls/ 1 answered. 

The bishop's face lit up. That was the justification of his entire life. 

'Thank you, my son/ he whispered, squeezing my hand affectionately. 

Zorba leaped from his coiner. 

'I've got a fourth theory!' he cried. 

I looked anxiously at him. The bishop turned to him. 

'Speak, my son, and may your theory be blessed! What is it?' 

'That two and two make four!' said Zorba gravely. 

The bishop looked at him, flabbergasted. 

'And a fifth theory, old man/ Zorba went on. "That two and two don't make four. Go on, 
my friend, take a chance! Make your choice!' 

'I don't understand/ stammered the old man, casting a questioning glance at me. 
'Neither do I!' said Zorba, bursting into laughter. 

I turned to the poor old man, who was abashed, and changed the subject. 
'What are your special studies here in the monastery, Reverend Father?' I asked. 
T am making copies of the ancient manuscripts of the 
221 

monastery, my son, and recently I have been collecting all the sacred epithets used 
by the Church in connection with the Virgin Mother/ 
He sighed. 

'I am old,' he said, 'and I can't do anything else. I find relief in listing all the verbal 

adornments of the Virgin, and thus I forget the miseries of this world.' 

He leaned his elbow on the pillow, closed his eyes and began murmuring as though in 

delirium: 

'Imperishable Rose, Fruitful Earth, Vine, Fountain, Source of Miracles, Ladder to 
Heaven, Bridge, Rescuing Frigate for the Shipwrecked, Haven of Rest, Key to Para- 
dise, Dawn, Eternal Light, Lightning, Pillar of Fire, Invincible General, Immovable 
Tower, Impregnable Fortress, Consolation, Joy, Staff for the Blind, Mother for the 
Orphan, Table, Food, Peace, Serenity, Perfume, Banquet, Milk and Honey...' 
"The old boy's delirious ... ' said Zorba in an undertone. Til cover him over so that he 
doesn't catch cold.' 

He stood up, threw a blanket over the bishop and put his pillow straight. 

"There are seventy-seven kinds of madness, so I've heard/ he said. "This one must be 

the seventy-eighth.' 

Day was dawning. We could hear the ringing of the semantron, I leaned my head out 
of the window. In the first rays of dawn I saw a gaunt monk, a long black hood over his 
head, walk slowly round the courtyard striking with a small hammer on a long piece of 
wood which had marvellously musical properties. The sound of the semantron echoed 
through the morning air, full of sweetness, harmony and appeal. The nightingales had 
stopped singing and other birds were beginning to chirp in the trees. 
I listened, charmed with the sweet evocative notes of the semantron. I thought how, 
even in decay, an elevated rhythm in life preserves all its outward form, is impressive 
and full of nobility. The spirit departs, but it leaves its vast 
222 

dwelling which it has slowly evolved and which is as intricate as a sea-shell. 
The wonderful cathedrals you see in noisy, godless cities are just such empty shells, I 
thought. Prehistoric monsters of which only a skeleton, worn by sun and rain, is left. 
There was a knock at the door of our cell. The unctuous voice of the hospitaller came 
to our ears. 

'Come, rise now, brothers, it's time for matins.' 
Zorba leaped up: 



'What was the revolver shot in the night?' he shouted, beside himself. 

He waited a moment. Silence. The monk must have heard him through the door, 

because we could hear his noisy breathing. Zorba stamped with rage. 

'What was that revolver shot?' he asked again, in a fury. 

We heard steps going rapidly away. With one bound Zorba was at the door. He 

opened it: 

'Filthy scoundrels! Blackguards!' he shouted, spitting in the direction of the retreating 
monk. 'Priests, nuns, monks, church-wardens, sacristans, the whole lot of you, that's 
all you're worth!' And he spat again. 
'Let's go!' I said, "There's a smell of blood in the air.' 

'If it were only blood!' grunted Zorba. 'You go to matins, boss, if you want to. I'll have a 
look round to see what I can find out.' 

'Let's go!' I said again, nauseated. 'And will you be good enough not to go poking your 

nose where it's none of your business?' 

"That's just where I always want to poke it!' said Zorba. 

He thought for a moment then smiled cunningly: 

"The devil is doing us a favour,' he said. 'I think he's bringing things to a head. Do you 
realise what that might cost the monastery, boss, a revolver shot like that? A cool 
seven thousand!' 

He went down into the courtyard. The scent of blossom, 
223 

morning sweetness, heavenly felicity. Zaharia was waiting for us. He ran up and 
seized Zorba's arm. 

'Brother Canavaro/ he whispered with a trembling voice, 'Come, we must go!' 
'What was that revolver shot? They killed somebody, didn't they? Come on, talk or I'll 
wring your neck!' 

The monk's chin quivered. He looked round him. The courtyard was deserted, the 

cells closed; through the open chapel door came waves of music. 

'Follow me, both of you,' he muttered. 'Sodom and Gomorrah!' 

We slipped along the side of the wall, gained the other side of the courtyard and went 

out of the garden. A hundred yards or so from the monastery was a cemetery. We 

went inside. 

We stepped over the graves, Zaharia pushed the little door of the chapel and we 
entered behind him. In the centre, on a rush mat, lay a body covered over with a 
monk's habit. There was a candle burning at both head and foot of the corpse. 
I stooped to look at the body. 

"The young monk!' I murmured with a shudder. 'Father Demetrios's fair-haired young 
novice!' 

On the door of the sanctuary, with widespread wings and unsheathed sword, and 
wearing red sandals, glittered the figure of the archangel Michael. 
'Archangel Michael!' cried the monk, 'send fire and brimstone and burn them all! 
Archangel Michael, do something. Leave your icon! Raise your sword and smite them! 
Did you not hear that revolver shot?' 

'Who killed him? Who was it? Demetrios? Speak, old goatbeard!' 

The monk slipped out of Zorba's grasp and threw himself flat on the floor before the 

archangel. He remained motionless for a few moments, face upraised, eyes starting 

from his head, mouth wide open, watching the icon intently. 

Suddenly he jumped for joy. 

224 

'I will burn them!' he declared in a resolute voice. "The archangel moved, I saw him, 
he made a sign to me!' 

He went close to the icon and glued his thick lips to the archangel's sword. 
'God be praised!' he said. 'I am relieved!' 
Zorba seized the monk again. 



'Come here, Zaharia,' he said. 'Now, you'll do what I tell you.' 
Then he turned to me. 

'Give me the money, boss, I'll sign the papers myself. They're all wolves in there, and 
you're a lamb, they'll eat you. Leave it to me. Don't you worry, I've got the fat hogs 
where I want them. We'll leave here at midday with the forest in our pockets. Come 
on, Zaharia.' 

They slipped away furtively towards the monastery. I went for a stroll under the 
pinetrees. 

The sun was high already and the dew was sparkling on the leaves. A blackbird in 
front of me flew on to the branch of a wild pear tree, flicked his tail, opened his beak, 
looked at me and whistled two or three mocking notes. 

Through the pines I could see the courtyard and the monks coming out in a long file, 
their heads bowed and black cowls hanging over their shoulders. The service was 
over, they were on their way to the refectory. 

'What a pity,' I thought, 'that such austerity and nobility should be without a soul.' 
I was tired, I had not slept well, and I stretched out on the grass. The wild violets, 
broom, rosemary and sage made the air redolent. Insects buzzed continually as in 
their hunger they plunged into the flowers like pirates and sucked the honey. In the 
distance the mountains sparkled, transparent, serene, like a moving haze in the 
burning light of the sun. 

I closed my eyes, soothed. A quiet, mysterious pleasure took possession of me - as if 
all that green miracle around me were paradise itself, as if all the freshness, airiness 
and sober rapture which I was feeling were God. God changes his 
225 

appearance every second. Blessed is the man who can recognise him in all his 
disguises. At one moment he is a glass of fresh water, the next your son bouncing on 
your knees or an enchanting woman, or perhaps merely a morning walk. 
Little by little, everything around me, without changing shape, became a dream. I was 
happy. Earth and paradise were one. A flower in the fields with a large drop of honey 
in its centre: that was how life appeared to me. And my soul, a wild bee plundering. 
I was brutally awakened from this state of beatitude. I heard steps behind me and 
whispers. At the same instant a happy voice cried: 
'Boss, we're off!' 

Zorba stood in front of me and his small eyes shone with a diabolical gleam. 

'Off?' I said with relief. 'Is it all settled?' 

'Everything!' said Zorba, tapping the upper part of his jacket. 

'Here's the forest. I hope it brings us luck! And here are the seven thousand Lola cost 
us!' 

He took a roll of banknotes from his inside pocket. 

'Take 'em!' he said. 'I pay my debts; I'm not ashamed to look you in the face any more. 
The stockings, and handbags, and perfume and Dame Bouboulina's parasol are all 
included in that. Even the parrot's nuts! And the halva I brought you, as well!' 
'Keep it yourself, Zorba; it's a present from me,' I said. 'Go and burn a candle to the 
Virgin you've sinned against.' 

Zorba turned round. Father Zaharia was coming towards us in his filthy gown, which 
was turning green, and his down-at-heel shoes. He was leading our two mules. 
Zorba showed him the roll of notes. 

'We'll split, Father Joseph,' he said. 'You can buy two hundred pounds of salt cod and 
stuff yourself with it till you burst your belly. Till you spew it up and deliver yourself 
from cod for ever and ever! Come on, hold out your paw!' 
226 

The monk took the dirty notes and hid them. 
'I shall buy some paraffin!' he said. 

Zorba lowered his voice and whispered in the old monk's ear. 



'In the dark when they're all asleep, the bearded old goats; and there must be a good 
wind,' he recommended. 'Sprinkle the walls on all sides. You only need soak some 
rags or cotton waste, anything, then put a light to it. Got the idea?' 
The monk was trembling. 

'Don't tremble like that! The archangel ordered you to do it, didn't he? Put your trust in 
paraffin and the grace of God! Good luck to you!' 
We mounted, and I took a last look at the monastery. 
'Have you learnt anything, Zorba?' I asked. 

'About the revolver shot? Don't worry your head about that, boss; old Zaharia's right: 
Sodom and Gomorrah! Deme-trios killed the nice little monk. There you have it.' 
'Demetrios? Why?' 

'Don't try to ferret it out, boss, it's all filth and foulness.' 

He turned towards the monastery. The monks were filing out of the refectory, heads 
bent, hands clasped, on their way to lock themselves in their cells. 
'Give me your curses, holy Fathers!' he cried. 
XIX 

rr-iHE first person we met as we dismounted on our beach J. that night was 
Bouboulina, who was sitting huddled up in front of the hut. When the lamp was lit and I 
saw her face I was alarmed. 

'What's wrong, Madame Hortense? Are you ill?' From the moment the great hope - 
marriage - had gleamed in her mind, our old siren had lost all her indefinable and 
dubious charms. She tried to wipe out the past and cast off the gaudy feathers with 
which she had adorned herself out of the spoils from her pashas, beys and admirals. 
She 
227 

had no aspiration beyond that of becoming a serious and respectable commoner, a 

good, virtuous woman. She no longer made up, nor decked herself out, she showed 

herself just as she was: a poor creature who wanted to get married. 

Zorba did not open his mouth. He kept nervously pulling at his newly dyed moustache. 

He bent down, lit the stove and put on some water for making coffee. 

'You're cruel!' the old cabaret singer said all of a sudden in a hoarse voice. 

Zorba raised his head and looked at her. His eyes softened. He could never hear a 

woman say anything to him in a harrowing tone without being completely 

overwhelmed. One tear from a woman could drown him. 

He said nothing, put the coffee and sugar in the pot, and stirred. 

'Why do you keep me pining so long before marrying me?' said the old siren. 'I daren't 

show myself in the village any more. I'm disgraced! Disgraced! I shall kill myself.' 

I was resting on the bed. Leaning with my elbow on the pillow, I enjoyed this comically 

moving scene. 

'Why didn't you bring the marriage wreaths?' 

Zorba felt Bouboulina's plump little hand trembling on his knee. That knee was the last 
inch of solid ground to which this poor creature of a thousand and one shipwrecks 
could cling. 

Zorba seemed to understand this and his heart relented. But once more he said 
nothing. He poured the coffee into three cups. 

'Why didn't you bring the marriage wreaths, darling?' she repeated in a quavering 
voice. 

'They haven't got any good ones in Candia,' Zorba replied curtly. 
He handed the cups round and squatted in a corner. 

'I've written to Athens for them to send some,' he went on. 'I've ordered some white 

candles, too, and sugared almonds with chocolate flavour.' 

228 

As he spoke his imagination kindled. His eyes sparkled, and like a poet in the burning 
second of creation, Zorba soared to heights where fiction and truth mingle and 



resemble each other, like sisters. He was squatting, and, resting thus, noisily drank 
his coffee. He lit a second cigarette; it had been a good day - he had the forest 
settlement in his pocket, he had paid off his debts, he was happy. He let himself go. 
'Our marriage, my sweet Bouboulina,' he said, 'must make a stir. You wait till you see 
the bridal gown I've ordered for you. That's why I stayed so long in Candia, my love. I 
sent for two big fashion-designers from Athens and I told them: "Look! The woman I'm 
going to marry has no equal in the East or West! She was the acknowledged queen of 
four great Powers; now she's a widow, the great Powers are dead and she's 
consented to take me as her husband. So I want her bridal gown to have no equal 
either: it must be all in silk, pearls and gold stars!" The two designers protested: "But 
that will be too beautiful!" they said. "All the guests will be blinded by such 
magnificence!" "Never mind about that!" I said. "What does it matter? As long as my 
beloved is satisfied!"' 

Dame Hortense listened to him, leaning against the wall. A wide, fleshy smile spread 
across her creased and flabby face, and the red ribbon round her neck was well nigh 
splitting. 

'I want to whisper in your ear,' she said to Zorba, making great sheep's eyes at him. 
Zorba winked at me and leaned forward. 

'I've brought you something tonight,' whispered his future wife, almost poking her little 
tongue into his big hairy ear. 

She pulled out of her bodice a handkerchief with one corner knotted, and proffered it 
to Zorba. 

He took the little handkerchief between two fingers and placed it on his right knee, 

then, turning to the door, looked out at the sea. 

229 

'Aren't you going to undo the knot, Zorba?' she asked. 'You don't seem to be in a 
hurry!' 

'Let me drink my coffee and smoke my cigarette first/ he answered. 'I don't have to 
undo it, I know what there is inside/ 
'Undo it, undo it!' the old siren begged him. 
Tm going to finish my smoke first, I tell you!' 

And he cast a glance of accusation at me, as if to say; "This is your fault!' 

He was smoking slowly, expelling the smoke from his nostrils as he looked at the sea. 

'We'll have a sirocco tomorrow,' he said. 'The weather's changed. The trees'll swell, 

and so will young girls' breasts -they'll be bursting out of their bodices! Ah! spring's a 

rogue! An invention of the devil!' 

He stopped speaking. A few moments later he added: 

'Have you noticed, boss, everything good in this world is an invention of the devil? 
Pretty women, spring, roast suckling, wine - the devil made them all! God made 
monks, fasting, camomile-tea and ugly women ... pooh!' 

As he said that he threw a fierce glance at poor Dame Hortense, who was curled up in 

a corner, listening to him. 

'Zorba! Zorba!' she implored him every second. 

But he lit another cigarette and started contemplating the sea afresh. 

Tn the spring/ he said, 'Satan reigns supreme. Belts are slackened, blouses 

unbuttoned, old ladies sigh ... Hands off, Bouboulina!' 

'Zorba! Zorba!' the poor old creature implored. She stooped to pick up the 

handkerchief and thrust it into his hand. 

He threw away his cigarette, took hold of the knot and undid it. He held his hand open 
and looked. 

'Whatever's this, Dame Bouboulina?' he asked with disgust. 

'Rings, little rings, my treasure. Wedding rings/ muttered the old siren, all of a tremble. 
'Here is a witness, God bless him, the night is beautiful, it's sirocco weather, God is 
watching, let's get engaged, Zorba!' 



Zorba looked now at me, now at Dame Hortense, now at the rings. A host of demons 
were fighting inside him and for the moment none was on top. The wretched woman 
looked at him in terror. 
'Zorba!... My Zorba!' she cooed. 

I had sat up on my bed and was watching. Of all courses open to him, which was 
Zorba going to choose? 

Suddenly he shook his head. He had made his decision. His face cleared, he clapped 
his hands and leaped up. 

'Let's go outside!' he cried. 'Beneath the stars, so that God himself can see us! You 
carry the rings, boss; can you chant?' 

'No/ 1 replied, amused. 'But that doesn't matter!' I had already jumped down from the 
bed and was helping the good lady to get up. 

'Well, I can. I forgot to tell you I was once a choirboy; I used to follow the priest at 
weddings, baptisms, funerals and so on; I learned all the church songs by heart. 
Come, my Bouboulina, come, hoist your sail, my little French frigate, and come on my 
right!' 

Of all Zorba's demons it was the kind-hearted clown who had won. Zorba had been 
sorry for the old siren, his heart had been torn when he saw her faded eyes fixed on 
him so anxiously. 

'Devil take me/ he muttered as he made his decision, 'I can still give some joy to the 
female of the species! Come on!' 

He rushed out onto the beach, took Dame Hortense's arm, gave me the rings, turned 

to the sea and began to chant: 

'Blessed be our Lord in the world without end, amen!' 

He turned to me and said: 

'Do your stuff, boss!' 

"There is no such thing as "boss" tonight/1 said. Tm your best man.' 

230 
231 

'Well, keep your wits about you, then. When I cry out: "Bravo!" you put the rings on.' 
He started chanting again in his deep ass's bray: 

'For the servant of God, Alexis, and the servant of God, Hortense, now affianced to 
each other, we beg salvation, O Lord.' 

'Kyrie eleison! Kyrie eleison!' I quavered, with difficulty controlling laughter and tears. 

"There's a lot more business, yet/ said Zorba, 'damned if I can remember it all! 

Anyway, let's get the ticklish part over!' 

He leaped in the air like a carp and cried: 

'Bravo! Bravo!' holding out his big hands towards me. 

'Now you hold out your little hand,' he said to his fiancee. 

The fat hand, lined with washing and housework, was held out trembling towards me. 
I put their rings on while Zorba, quite beside himself, roared out like a Dervish: 
"The servant of God, Alexis is affianced to the servant of God Hortense, in the name 
of God the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, amen! The servant of God, Hortense 
is affianced to the servant of God, Alexis!' 

'Good. Now, that's done till next year! Come here, my sweet, let me give you the first 
respectable and legitimate kiss you've ever had!' 

But Dame Hortense had collapsed to the ground; she was clasping Zorba's legs and 

weeping. Zorba shook his head with compassion. 

'Poor women! What fools they are!' he murmured. 

Dame Hortense stood up, shook her skirt and opened her arms. 

'Eh, now!' shouted Zorba. 'It's Shrove Tuesday today, keep your hands off! It's Lent!' 

'My Zorba ...' she faltered faintly. 

'Patience, my dear. Wait till Easter; we'll eat some meat then, and crack red eggs 



together. Now it's time you were 
232 

getting home. What will folks say if they see you hanging about here till this time of 
night?' 

Bouboulina's look was imploring. 

'No! No! It's Lent!' said Zorba. 'Not before Easter! Come along with us.' 

He leaned over and said in my ear: 

'Don't leave us alone, for God's sake! I'm not in the mood!' 

We took the road to the village. The sky was bright, the tang of the sea enveloped us, 
the birds of night hooted about us. The old siren, hanging on to Zorba's arm, dragged 
along happy but disappointed. 

She had at last entered the harbour she had yearned for so much. All her life she had 
sung and danced, had a high old time, made fun of decent women ... but her heart 
had been torn to shreds. When she went by, perfumed and heavily plastered with 
paint, wearing loud and garish clothes, in the streets of Alexandria, Beirut, Constanti- 
nople, and saw women giving the breast to their babies, her own breast tingled and 
swelled, her nipples stood out, asking for a tiny childlike mouth as well. 'Get a 
husband, get a husband have a child ... ' that had been her dream throughout her long 
life. But she never revealed these painful longings to a living soul. Now, God be 
praised, a little late but better than never, she was entering the longed-for haven, 
though crippled and buffeted by the waves. 

From time to time she raised her eyes and peeped sideways at the great gawk of a 
fellow who was striding beside her. 'He isn't a rich pasha with a gold-tasselled fez,' 
she was thinking, 'and he's not the handsome son of a bey, but, God be praised, he's 
better than nothing! He will be my husband! My husband for ever, God be praised!' 
Zorba felt her weighing on his arm and dragged her on eager to reach the village and 
be rid of her. And the poor woman kept tripping over the stones in the road; her 
toenails were almost torn out, her corns were hurting, but she said 
233 

not a word. Why speak? Why complain? Everything was splendid, praise be to God! 
We passed the Fig Tree of Our Young Lady and the widow's garden, and when the 
first village houses appeared we stopped. 

'Good night, my treasure,' said the old siren fondly, standing up on tiptoe to reach her 

fiance's lips. 

But Zorba did not bend. 

'Let me kiss your feet, my love!' said Bouboulina, making ready to drop to the ground. 
'No! No!' protested Zorba. He was moved and took her in his arms. T ought to kiss 
your feet, my love! I ought to ... but I don't feel up to it! Good night!' 
We left her and went in silence along the road, breathing in the scented air. Zorba 
suddenly turned to me. 

'What ought we to do, boss? Laugh? Or cry? Give me some advice.' 

I made no answer. I was tight about the throat, too, and could not say why: was it from 

laughing or crying? 

'Boss,' said Zorba suddenly, 'who was that rascally god who would never let a single 
woman have room for complaint? I've heard something about him, I know. It seems he 
used to dye his beard, too, and tattooed hearts and arrows and sirens on his arms; he 
used to disguise himself, they say: turned into a bull, a swan, a ram, and, saving his 
reverence, an ass; in fact, whatever the jades desired. What was his name?' 
'You must be talking about Zeus. What made you think of him?' 'God preserve his 
soul!' said Zorba, raising his arms to heaven. 'He had some rough times, he did! What 
he must have gone through! A great martyr, believe me, boss! You swallow every 
thing your books say, but just think a moment what the people who write books are 
like! Pff! a lot of schoolmasters. What do they know about women, or men who run 
after women? Not the first thing!' 



'Why don't you write a book yourself, Zorba? And explain all the mysteries of the world 

to us?' I sneered. 

234 

'Why not? For the simple reason that I live all those mysteries, as you call them, and I 
haven't the time to write. Sometimes it's war, sometimes women, sometimes wine, 
sometimes the santuri: where would I find time to drive a miserable pen? That's how 
the business falls into the hands of the pen-pushers! All those who actually live the 
mysteries of life haven't the time to write, and all those who have the time don't live 
them! D'you see?' 

'Let's get back to our subject! What about Zeus?' 

'Ah! the poor chap!' sighed Zorba. 'I'm the only one to know what he suffered. He 
loved women, of course, but not the way you think, you pen-pushers! Not at all! He 
was sorry for them! He understood what they all suffered and he sacrificed himself for 
their sakes! When, in some god-forsaken country hole, he saw an old maid wasting 
away with desire and regret, or a pretty young wife - or even if she wasn't at all pretty, 
even if she was a monster - and her husband away and she couldn't get to sleep, he 
used to cross himself, this good fellow, changed his clothes, take on whatever shape 
the woman had in mind and go to her room. 

'He never bothered about women who just wanted petting. No! Often enough even he 
was dead-beat: you can understand that. How could anybody satisfy all those she- 
goats? Ah! Zeus! the poor old goat, More than once he couldn't be bothered, he didn't 
feel too good. Have you never seen a billy after he's covered several she-goats? He 
slobbers at the mouth, his eyes are all misty and rheumy, he coughs a bit and can 
hardly stand on his feet. Well, poor old Zeus must have been in that sad state quite 
often. 

'At dawn he'd come home, saying: "Ah! my God! whenever shall I be able to have a 
good night's rest? I'm dropping!" And he'd keep wiping the saliva from his mouth. 
'But suddenly he'd hear a sigh: down there on earth some woman had thrown off her 
bedclothes, gone out onto the balcony, almost stark naked, and was sighing enough 
to turn the sails of a mill! And my old Zeus would be quite over- 
235 

come. "Oh, hell! I'll have to go down again!" he'd groan. "There's a woman bemoaning 
her lot! I'll have to go and console her!" 

'And it went on like that to such an extent that the women emptied him completely. He 
couldn't move his back, he started vomiting, became paralysed and died. That's when 
his heir, Christ, arrived. He saw the wretched state the old man was in: "Beware of 
women!" he cried.' 

I admired Zorba's freshness of mind and rocked with laughter. 
'You can laugh, boss! But if the god-devil makes our little venture here successful - it 
seems impossible to me, but still - do you know what sort of shop I'll open? A marriage 
bureau. Yes ... that's right. "The Zeus Marriage Agency"! Then the poor women who 
haven't managed to pick up a husband can all have another chance: old maids, plain 
women, the knock-kneed, the cross-eyed, the hump-backed, the lame, and I shall 
receive them all in a small lounge with a crowd of photographs on the walls of fine 
young fellows, and I'll say to them: "Take your pick, ladies, choose the one you want, 
and I'll set about making him your husband." Then I'll find any fellow who looks a bit 
like the photo, dress him up the same, give him some money and tell him: "So-and-so 
Street, such-and-such a number, go and see Miss What's-it and make violent love to 
her. Don't be disgusted; I'll pay for it. Sleep with her. Tell her all the nice things a man 
ever tells a woman; she's never heard any of them, poor creature. Swear you'll marry 
her. Give the poor wretch a bit of pleasure, the sort of pleasure nanny-goats have, 
and even tortoises and centipedes." 

'And if some old nanny turned up on the lines of our old Bouboulina - God bless her! - 



and nobody would agree to console her, no matter how much I paid him, well ... I'd 
cross myself, and I, director of the marriage bureau, would do it in person! Then you'd 
hear all the old fools of the neighbourhood saying: "Look at that! What an old rake! 
236 

Hasn't he any eyes to see or nose to smell with?" "Yes, you bunch of donkeys, I have 
got eyes! Yes, you pack of flint-hearted gossips, I have got a nose! But I've got a 
heart, too, and I'm sorry for her! And if you've got a heart, it's no use having all the 
eyes and noses in the world. When the time comes, they don't count a jot!" 
'Then, when I'm absolutely impotent myself, through sowing wild oats, and I peg out, 
Saint Peter the Porter will open the gate of Paradise to me: "Come in, Zorba, poor fel- 
low," he'll say; "come in, Zorba the martyr. Go and lie down beside your comrade, 
Zeus! Rest, old chap, you did your bit on earth! My blessing on you!'" 
Zorba went on talking. His imagination laid traps for him and he fell right into them. He 
began to believe in his own stories. As we were passing the Fig Tree of Our Young 
Lady he sighed. Then holding out his arms as though swearing an oath, he said: 
'Don't fret, Bouboulina, poor ill-treated rotting old hulk. Don't fret! I won't leave you 
without consolation! You may have been abandoned by the four great Powers, by 
youth, and even by God himself, but I, Zorba, will not abandon you!' 
It was after midnight when we got back to the beach, and the wind was rising. From 
yonder, from Africa, came the Notus, the warm south wind which swells out the trees, 
the vines, and the breasts of Crete. The whole island, as it lay by the water, came to 
life beneath the warm breath of this wind which makes the sap begin to rise. Zeus, 
Zorba and the south wind mingled together, and in the night I distinctly saw a great 
male face, with black beard and oily hair, bending down and pressing hot red lips on 
Dame Hortense, the Earth. 
237 
